
 FORMULA
String Theory with Eight Supercharges M. Guica
and A. Strominger
These lectures give an introduction
to the interrelated topics of Calabi-Yau compactification of the
type II string, black hole attractors, the all-orders entropy
formula, the dual FORMULA  CFT, topological strings and the OSV
conjecture. Based on notes by MG of lectures by AS at the 2006
Cargèse summer school.

Cargèse Lectures on String Theory with Eight SuperchargesMonica Guica and Andrew Strominger Jefferson Physical
LaboratoryHarvard University Cambridge, MA 021382020/09/07 18:38:19
Introduction
One of the best understood quantum systems is IIB string theory on
FORMULA  with its dual presentation as FORMULA  Yang Mills
gauge theory. The tractability of this system is in large part due
to the large supersymmetry group which has the maximal 32
supercharges. But a large symmetry group is both a blessing and a
curse. It is a blessing because many features of the theory can be
deduced using symmetry arguments alone. It is a curse because these
same symmetries limit the possible dynamics and questions we can
ask. For example, true tests of the various dualities which are not
already implied by the symmetries of the 32-supercharge theory are
relatively hard to find.
As the number of supersymmetries is decreased, more dynamical
possibilities are unleashed, often with no counterparts in their
more symmetric cousins. Ultimately the most interesting and most
physically relevant case is no supersymmetry at all. But at the
moment analytic control in this case is quite limited.
FIGURE 
At the current juncture, the intermediate case of eight
supercharges has proven to be especially fertile ground for progress.
Eight supercharges is where black holes are first encounteredOf course, black holes
exist in compactifications with more supersymmetry, but the near-horizon geometry
has at most eight supersymmetries in all known examples., as well as Calabi-Yau spaces
and
topological strings. Despite several decades of work in this area,
qualitative new surprises are still appearing
(e.g.{{cite:aea11133-db40-43c2-bb83-cfa0aceefb98}}, {{cite:69e62e00-5ee7-410f-a37c-9035c75d7ef8}}, {{cite:d7d64b34-5987-46a5-a1a3-59c4c840320c}}, {{cite:c56394e0-a6f3-4261-a044-89fe22e4e40d}}). It
is likely that a few more will still appear before the eight-supercharge
jigsaw puzzle, illustrated in figure
1, is pieced together. For example it has been suggested {{cite:3ce84b25-caf6-4174-b614-06125dbeb825}}, {{cite:43eca82b-1323-4a17-b5e4-ce686ccae2d5}} that
number theory, which has yet to be fully wed to string theory,
will play a prominent role. Another likely suspect, as yet to fully appear in
the story,
is the enigmatic FORMULA  duality.
Among the fascinating connections illustrated in figure REF ,
these lectures will focus on those directly relevant to
understanding the so-called OSV conjecture {{cite:d7d64b34-5987-46a5-a1a3-59c4c840320c}}. The agreement
between the Bekenstein-Hawking area law and the microscopic
state counting for certain stringy black holes with eight near-horizon
supercharges has been the source of many deep insights into string theory and quantum gravity.
But this area law is just the first term in an infinite series approximating
the exact expression for black hole entropy. OSV
conjecturally relates every term in this series to expansion
coefficients of the topological string, thereby potentially allowing for
“precision tests” of holographic duality. We are likely to have
much to learn by precisely formulating, proving or disproving OSV.
In these lectures we will present some introductory material on
string theory with eight supercharges, aimed at the student
preparing for research in this area, and building up to a discussion of the
OSV conjecture
in the last section. For excellent and recent reviews at a
more advanced level see {{cite:1adedbcf-07c2-463c-b89d-ba0bd46a35f1}}, {{cite:8ec12505-2e6c-47a2-b0a8-3f6812bcd784}}. We begin
in lecture 2 with the basics of Type II Calabi-Yau
compactification, BPS black holes, attractors, and their CFT
duals. In lecture 3 we give a brief introduction to the
topological string. In lecture 4 we describe the OSV conjecture
which relates lectures 2 and 3. In lecture 5 we conclude by summarizing the
various partition functions we have encountered along the way,
the extent to which they are well defined, and the relations
between them.

BPS Calabi-Yau black holes 
In this lecture we will briefly review the field content of type
IIA/IIB string theory compactified on a Calabi-Yau manifold, and the
resulting FORMULA  FORMULA  supergravity action. We will show that the
FORMULA  theory admits supersymmetric black hole solutions of the
extremal Reissner-Nordstrøm type, which exhibit an interesting
attractor mechanism for the vector moduli as one approaches the
horizon of the black hole. The macroscopic entropy of these black
holes is computed and it is shown how to include higher order
corrections. We briefly discuss the proposed microscopic dual, known
as the MSW CFT, for the special case of no FORMULA  charge. (Finding the
dual for the general case is an important unsolved problem). We also
describe the index - the modified elliptic genus - which counts the
weighted number of BPS states in this CFT.
Throughout these lectures, we will use whichever of the type IIA/IIB
languages makes the exposition simplest. Thus the FORMULA  FORMULA  action
will be discussed mostly in the context of IIB compactifications,
while in order to talk about black holes we will switch to the IIA
description, which is also the one appropriate for understanding the
OSV conjecture.
IIB Calabi-Yau compactification
The bosonic FORMULA  field content of type IIB string theory is as
follows: from the NS-NS sector we get the graviton FORMULA , the
antisymmetric tensor field FORMULA  with field strength FORMULA , and the dilaton FORMULA . From the R-R sector we have a
scalar FORMULA  (the axion), a two-form with FORMULA  and a
self-dual four-form obeying (at the linearized level) FORMULA .
Compactifying six of the ten dimensions on a Calabi-Yau manifold FORMULA 
breaks three quarters of the original 32 component supersymmetries
of type IIB supergravity. Since in four dimensions the minimal
spinors have four components, the eight supersymmetries we are left
with give FORMULA  supergravity in four dimensions. This
theory - described in great detail in the fundamental paper
{{cite:caa2eb57-4ce0-4a1a-8e29-29e11c936010}} - has an FORMULA  FORMULA -symmetry under which the
two supercharges transform as doublets. The massless fields fall
into FORMULA  representations labeled by their highest spins.
Three kinds of multiplets appear:

gravity multiplet: contains the graviton
(2), two gravitini (FORMULA ) in an FORMULA  doublet and the
graviphoton (1),

vector multiplets: contain one photon (1), two fermions (FORMULA ) in an FORMULA  doublet
and two real scalars (0),

hypermultiplets: contain two hyperfermions (FORMULA )
and four hyperscalars (0) in two FORMULA  doublets,

where in
parentheses we have written the spins of the corresponding
particles.
Now let us figure out how many multiplets of each kind we get from
the compactificationHere we will only follow what happens
to the massless bosons that arise from the compactification; the
fermions complete the supermultiplets.. Upon dimensional reduction
from FORMULA  to FORMULA , the massless wave equation splits into two
pieces, schematically FORMULA . Harmonic
forms FORMULA  satisfy FORMULA  and they are in
one-to-one correspondence with cohomology classes on FORMULA , whose
numbers are counted by the Hodge numbers of FORMULA ,
 FORMULAFORMULA  is the number of harmonic forms of
antiholomorphic rank FORMULA  and holomorphic rank FORMULA . A Calabi-Yau
manifold has FORMULA , FORMULA  for FORMULA , one harmonic
(0,3) form FORMULA  and its (3,0) conjugate FORMULA , and
FORMULA , FORMULA . All other Hodge numbers are
given by Poincaré duality FORMULA . There is a
total of FORMULA  harmonic three-forms on FORMULA .. Thus
harmonic forms on FORMULA  lead to massless fields in FORMULA .
There are two multiplets that we obtain in FORMULA  compactification of
type IIB on a Calabi-Yau: the gravity multiplet and the so-called
universal hypermultiplet. The universal hypermultiplet
consists of the FORMULA  dilaton FORMULA , the FORMULA  axion FORMULA , plus two
more massless scalars FORMULA  and FORMULA  defined by writing  FORMULAThe Bianchi identity FORMULA 
becomes FORMULA , which is the equation of
motion for a massless FORMULA  scalar. and FORMULA .
The bosonic content of the universal hypermultiplet is then FORMULA  and it will obviously be the same no matter which
Calabi-Yau we choose to compactify on. Importantly, the string
coupling constant FORMULA  always belongs to this
hypermultiplet.
To figure out the remaining multiplets, choose an integral basis of
harmonic three-forms on the Calabi-Yau,
(FORMULA ), with FORMULA , which satisfy
FORMULA 
define the periods as integrals of the holomorphic three-form over
the 3-cycles dual to FORMULA  as
FORMULA 
and let FORMULA  denote an integral basis of harmonic
two-forms, FORMULA . Using Greek letters for
FORMULA  space-time indices and Latin letters for Calabi-Yau indices,
and FORMULA  for a FORMULA  spacetime coordinate, the decomposition of the
various fields is then

FORMULA  FORMULA  - the FORMULA  graviton; FORMULA  - FORMULA  real FORMULA  scalars
corresponding to Kähler deformations of the metric on FORMULA ;
FORMULA  complex scalars FORMULA , FORMULA  corresponding to
deformations of the complex structure of MA complex
structure deformation mixes the holomorphic and antiholomorphic
coordinates as FORMULA . If
we lower the index on FORMULA  by contracting with the
holomorphic three-form FORMULA  the resulting FORMULA  are in one-to-one
correspondence with the harmonic (2,1) forms on the Calabi-Yau..
The periods FORMULA  provide projective coordinates on the moduli
space of complex structure deformations.

FORMULA  -scalar in the universal hypermultiplet, as discussed;
FORMULA  - FORMULA  real scalars.

FORMULA  Similar to the FORMULA 
case, we get one scalar field FORMULA  from the space-time part of FORMULA  and another
FORMULA  real scalars
FORMULA  from the two forms on FORMULA .

FORMULA Decomposing FORMULA  as FORMULA 
and imposing the self-duality condition FORMULA  we
get FORMULA  FORMULA  massless FORMULA  gauge bosons. We also get
FORMULA  scalars from decomposing FORMULA , where FORMULA  are harmonic (2,2) forms on FORMULA .

The
supersymmetry transformations (which we don't reproduce here) tell
us how these bosonic fields group into multiplets. Out of the total
of FORMULA  gauge fields, one linear combination -determined from
the supersymmetry transformations - has to end up in the gravity
multiplet and hence is called the graviphoton. We denote the
graviphoton by FORMULA  and the remaining gauge bosons by
FORMULA , where FORMULA  takes only FORMULA  values. The groupings
of the bosonic fields are then

the gravity multiplet (FORMULA , FORMULA )

FORMULA  vector multiplets (FORMULA ; FORMULA )

FORMULA  hypermultiplets (FORMULA )

the IIB universal hypermultiplet (FORMULA )

As shown in {{cite:caa2eb57-4ce0-4a1a-8e29-29e11c936010}}, supersymmetry does not allow
couplings between vector and hypermultiplets in the leading FORMULA 
effective action, if the hypermultiplets are neutral. Since FORMULA  is in a neutral hypermultiplet, supersymmetry then tells
us that there are no string loop corrections to the tree-level
results. In particular, the metric on the moduli space FORMULA  of the
vector multiplets (the complex structure moduli for type IIB
compactifications) is exact at tree level, and is read off from the
kinetic terms in the FORMULA  Lagrangian.

IIA Calabi-Yau compactification
We now repeat the analysis of the previous section for type IIA on
a Calabi-Yau FORMULA . The FORMULA  field content is now given by the
graviton FORMULA , the NS-NS two form FORMULA , the dilaton FORMULA ,
an RR two-form field strength FORMULA  and a four-form FORMULA . The dimensional reduction of the metric gives us, as
usual, the FORMULA  graviton, FORMULA  real Kähler moduli FORMULA 
and FORMULA  (complex) complex structure moduli FORMULA . The
reduction of the FORMULA -field gives FORMULA  scalars FORMULA  and
FORMULA . FORMULA  will just give one vector field and FORMULA  will
give rise to FORMULA  vectors FORMULA  and FORMULA  real
scalars via the decomposition FORMULA . One linear combination of the vector fields will
be again the graviphoton. The multiplets we obtain are then

the gravity multiplet (FORMULA , FORMULA )

FORMULA  vector multiplets (FORMULA , FORMULA , FORMULA )

FORMULA  hypermultiplets (FORMULA , FORMULA )

IIA universal hypermultiplet (FORMULA )

While FORMULA  (the Calabi-Yau must have a (1,1)
Kähler form), FORMULA  can be zero (that is a Calabi-Yau with
no complex structure deformations). In that case there is only one
hypermultiplet - the universal one. Note that the numbers of vector
and hypermultiplets we get in type IIA/IIB compactifications are
consistent with mirror symmetry, which exchanges complex structure
and Kähler moduli.
The dilaton is again in a hypermultiplet, so once more the moduli
space of the vector multiplets does not get corrected by string
loopsSince in type IIA compactifications the vector
multiplet scalars correspond to Kähler moduli, the metric on the
moduli space can receive worldsheet FORMULA  corrections from
string instantons wrapping the two-cycles in the Calabi-Yau (see
also section 3.2). This is to be contrasted with type IIB, where the
tree-level metric is exact..

FORMULA  FORMULA  supergravity and special geometry 
FORMULA  supersymmetry highly constrains the form of the Lagrangian.
As far as the scalars are concerned, we already mentioned that the
moduli space of the theory factorizes into a target space FORMULA 
parameterized by the vevs of the vector moduli, and FORMULA ,
parameterized by the hypermultiplet scalar vevs. Supersymmetry
requires that FORMULA  be a special Kähler manifold
{{cite:caa2eb57-4ce0-4a1a-8e29-29e11c936010}}, {{cite:cd62c416-e325-446b-b41b-4d0eb8a1c95d}}, {{cite:2df29f5e-e485-476a-8715-776085b482e8}}, while FORMULA 
is restricted to be a quaternionic Kähler manifold
{{cite:4dfd01ab-5bf9-4538-9129-2c92a0f0fe89}}. In these lectures we will only be concerned
with the action for the vector multiplets. The kinetic terms are determined entirely from the holomorphic prepotential
FORMULA  of the FORMULA  theory, which in our context is determined by the
Calabi-Yau geometry and computed from tree level string theory. A
more detailed recent review can be found in {{cite:553eb29b-b137-458d-931a-270e3c2612f3}},
whose conventions we follow.
Let us now collect a few soon-to-be-needed facts about the leading terms in the
FORMULA 
Lagrangian{{cite:caa2eb57-4ce0-4a1a-8e29-29e11c936010}}, {{cite:553eb29b-b137-458d-931a-270e3c2612f3}}, {{cite:fa513773-13e9-4457-8a24-effbe99c5fe5}}, which correspond to
considering just the tree level term in the Calabi-Yau prepotential (FORMULA  in (REF ); see de
Wit's lectures for more details). To
be specific, we assume here that our FORMULA 
action was
obtained by compactification of type IIB. In the basis introduced in the previous section,
the holomorphic three-form can be written as
FORMULA 
FORMULA  (or
FORMULA ) turn out to be projective coordinates on the vector
multiplet moduli space (parameterized by FORMULA , FORMULA ), whose geometry is completely determined by the
choice of holomorphic three-form FORMULA . The Kähler
potential on FORMULA  is given by
FORMULA 
which can be rewritten
as
FORMULA 
The periods FORMULA  can be obtained from the
prepotential as
FORMULA 
One
choice of (non-projective) holomorphic coordinates on FORMULA  are
special coordinates
FORMULA 
While using these coordinates is useful
for a large number of purposes, please note that the symplectic
invariance of the action is no longer manifest, which may sometimes
not be very convenient. Note also that while FORMULA  and FORMULA 
are holomorphic, sometimes (especially in the supergravity
literature) people find it useful to define the rescaled periods
FORMULA , which are
no longer holomorphic.
Another piece of information we need from the FORMULA  Lagrangian are
the gauge kinetic terms. They read
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  are the the self-dual and anti-self-dual
parts of the gauge fieldsIn four Lorentzian dimensions,
(anti)self-duality reads FORMULA .. The expression for FORMULA  in terms of the prepotential
and its derivatives is
FORMULA 
where FORMULA 
denote the second derivatives of the prepotential with respect to
FORMULA  and FORMULA  and FORMULA .
One can easily show that
FORMULA 
a relation that will be useful later.
The integral of FORMULA  over a sphere at infinity gives the
magnetic charge of the field configuration we are studying.
FORMULA 
The total electric charge is usually
given by the integral of the dual field strength over the sphere at
infinity, which follows from the Maxwell equation FORMULA .
Note that our action () gives rise to different
equations of motion, which imply that the electric charge is given
by
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA 
or
equivalently
FORMULA 
One last thing we would like to
explain is how to recognise which linear combination of the gauge
fields is the graviphoton. We know that the particular combination
has to be symplectically invariant, since which field is in the
gravity multiplet should not depend on the choice of symplectic
basis.
From the field strengths FORMULA  and the periods one
can construct a naturally symplectically-invariant field strength,
given by
FORMULA 
which corresponds to the graviphoton. The graviphoton
is also special in that its charge
FORMULA 
is proportional to the central charge of the FORMULA 
supersymmetry algebraNote that the Q so defined rescales
under projective transformations.. If we restrict our attention to
just supersymmetric solutions (preserving 4 or 8 supercharges), then
FORMULA 
when evaluated on
these solutions, so the graviphoton charge becomes
FORMULA 
which generally is
complex.
Having talked at length about electric and magnetic charges in the
FORMULA  theory, we might as well mention how to obtain charged
particles in string theory compactified on a Calabi-Yau FORMULA . The
answer is simple: just wrap D-branes on the various cycles in FORMULA .
The string theory D-branes source the FORMULA  RR fields, which from the FORMULA 
point of view look like pointlike charges that source the
different gauge fields which come from the dimensional reduction of
the FORMULA  RR fields. In type IIB, D3-branes can wrap any of the FORMULA  different 3-cycles, giving a total of FORMULA 
different electric and magnetic charges in FORMULA . The number of units
of FORMULA  charge is determined by how many times we wrap the
FORMULA -branes around the particular cycle.
In type IIA the stable D-branes are even-dimensional. One can again
produce any electric and magnetic charges by wrapping D6, D4, D2 and
D0 branes on the various cycles in the Calabi-Yau. If FORMULA  labels the 2 (and also the dual 4)-cycles, then
the most general set of charges we can get is FORMULA , which stands for D6, D4 (magnetic) and D2, D0 (electric)
charges respectively.
If we wrap a large number of branes at the same point in noncompact
FORMULA  space, we will have to consider the backreaction of the metric
and the other supergravity fields. It turns out that for large
charges one can obtain macroscopic black holes
{{cite:cad2b0c2-7dcc-445d-805f-3422081d15cd}}, {{cite:70b99be1-1b2f-457b-92bb-a68646faa826}}, which we will now turn to study.

Black hole solutions
In a classic paper {{cite:47c897bc-07bb-4a4b-9439-cecd4fff9df0}}, Gibbons and Hull have
shown that minimal FORMULA  FORMULA  supergravity (whose bosonic sector is
just Einstein - Maxwell gravity) has charged black hole solutions of
the Reissner-Nordstrøm type. These solutions are parametrised by
their mass FORMULA  and charge FORMULA . Since FORMULA 
happens to equal the central charge of the FORMULA  supersymmetric
theory, then the BPS bound requires that these black holes have FORMULA . If FORMULA  their Hawking temperature is nonzero, which
means
they can radiate and thus are not stable objects. Since we are
looking for supersymmetric solutions, which have to be stable, the
remaining candidate is the extremal solution with FORMULA . The
Hawking temperature of these black holes is zero and the solution
indeed turns out to be supersymmetric. These extremal objects have
been the focus of many interesting investigations over the years.
The easiest way to see whether a particular solution is
supersymmetric is to look at the fermion variations for that
particular background and require that they vanish. The only
fermions present in minimal supergravity are the gravitini, whose
variation is
FORMULA 
The solution will
be supersymmetric if there exists a spinor FORMULA  such that
FORMULA . It turns out that there exist four such
spinors, so the solution preserves half of the original eight
supersymmetries.
FIGURE 
The expression for the metric is
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA 
The solution carries charge FORMULA , as
the expression we get for the graviphoton indicates
FORMULA 
As FORMULA , FORMULA  and the
metric becomes just the flat metric on FORMULA . As FORMULA  the metric takes the form
FORMULA 
The near-horizon
geometry is thus FORMULA , and the area of the horizon is
FORMULA . The near horizon bosonic isometry group
is FORMULA , which is part of the FORMULA 
superisometry group containing the maximal eight supersymmetries.
This means that FORMULA  is a maximal FORMULA  vacuum, and
hence the Reissner-Nordstrøm solution we obtained can be thought
of as a soliton radially interpolating between two maximally
supersymmetric vacua {{cite:9020e226-8ab7-4c05-8f2d-c1de5365b1cf}}.
FIGURE 

The attractor equations
Next, we add in vector multiplets
{{cite:dd511a22-81c9-4c1b-bd00-3b8fb3044da7}}, {{cite:c2d68bcd-189c-4308-849f-fbc9d4009d87}}. The gravitini variations
now acquire extra terms, which contain derivatives of the vector moduli
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA 
where in the above two and the following equations we have fixed the
gauge FORMULA .
The supersymmetry variations of the fermions in the vector multiplets
(the gaugini) are
FORMULA 
We would like to
see if a maximally supersymmetric near-horizon FORMULA 
region with an FORMULA  superisometry group can still exist. This
requires that the moduli FORMULA  be constant throughout the
near-horizon spacetime. Then the gravitini variations vanish as
before and the gaugino equations require that
FORMULA 
Integrating
our previous solution for the graviphoton FORMULA  (where FORMULA  is a self-dual two-form) over the
horizon FORMULA  we find
FORMULA 
for some complex
constant FORMULA , which in general will depend on our choice of
projective gaugeFor FORMULA ,
we have FORMULA .. Similarly,
FORMULA 
We thus see that the moduli FORMULA , FORMULA  must take very
specific values in terms of the black hole charges in order to
recover the FORMULA  part of the solution in the
near-horizon region. For reasons which will become clear shortly
these equations are known as the attractor equations.
The attractor equations, together with knowledge of the
prepotential FORMULA , generically let
us determine in principle (up to possible discrete choices) the real
and imaginary parts of all FORMULA  in terms of the
charges of the black hole. This can be easily checked by counting the
number of equations and unknowns.
The Bekenstein-Hawking entropy depends only on the near-horizon data
and is simply given by the horizon value of
FORMULA 
After solving the attractor equations, the entropy
becomes just a function of the charges of the black hole, and does
not depend on any asymptotic data, such as the asymptotic values of
the moduli (as long as we do not leave the basin of attraction).
In general one might want to find the full black hole solution,
including the asymptotic region. This is a harder problem, and one
we will not need to solve for now because the full solution has the
form of a radially interpolating soliton, with the moduli in the
maximally-symmetric near horizon region determined by the charges of
the black hole via the attractor equations. So, given the charges
and the value FORMULA  of the moduli at infinity, the
variation through space of FORMULA  will be such that it always goes
to the horizon value FORMULA  determined by the attractor
equations {{cite:0d88be0d-2b86-49bf-97c0-b1e7a424eb16}}. The path traced in moduli space by
FORMULA  We here only consider spherically-symmetric
solutions. It turns out there also exist multicenter solutions
{{cite:aea11133-db40-43c2-bb83-cfa0aceefb98}}. is called an attractor flow.
FIGURE 
While at first this behavior of the vector moduli might seem a bit
surprising, it is actually required for the existence of sensible
counting of microstates of the black hole: the area of the horizon
depends on FORMULA , but at the same time it is the logarithm
of the number of microstates of the black hole - that is - the log
of an integer. Therefore one does not expect it to smoothly depend
on continuous parameters such as the asymptotic values of the
moduli.However a more refined analysis shows that it can
depend FORMULA  on the asymptotic
moduli{{cite:aea11133-db40-43c2-bb83-cfa0aceefb98}}. This leads to very interesting
modifications of the simplified picture presented here.
See
{{cite:61f048b8-7ec8-44b5-ac03-d360ce0867de}} for a recent discussion. Additionally, the
entropy is not expected to depend on parameters that we may choose
to tune at infinity, since it is an intrinsic property of the black
hole. Note that there is no attractor mechanism for the
hypermultiplet moduli, but this does not affect the above reasoning,
since the horizon hyperscalar vevs drop out of the entropy
formulaIn recent work by Sen {{cite:978750b9-6be6-407b-bf35-369a98610d50}}, it was
shown that all fields that the entropy depends on at the horizon
must be subject to an attractor mechanism. His reasoning works not
only for supersymmetric black holes, but any black hole whose
near-horizon symmetry group contains FORMULA 
{{cite:c2670dd1-e342-477d-bb4c-38378b019f76}}, {{cite:022e6f7f-7dad-41df-ad3d-2bed990ad948}}, {{cite:050fba6c-8f75-41da-8412-40d1baf33ee8}}, {{cite:0a14645a-cb55-4ff3-be42-668b6ac39a90}}, {{cite:6984ac23-b578-4813-a838-6a18eee963dc}}, {{cite:1524113e-a558-4c14-bc1a-f1b5e2e2b83f}}..
 A simple example
Maybe the simplest example {{cite:082122c3-40db-4d74-b571-611a304a8074}} is to consider IIA
compactified on a Calabi-Yau with moduli FORMULA . In the
large-volume limit we can take the Calabi-Yau prepotential to be
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  are the intersection numbers of the Calabi-Yau. In that
case we have
FORMULA 
We will
consider a FORMULA -FORMULA  black hole, with charges FORMULA  and FORMULA . The attractor equations read
FORMULA 
It is easy to
see that the solution to the above equations is
FORMULA 
where we have defined FORMULA . From (REF ) we can compute the
macroscopic entropy associated with this black hole
FORMULA 

The general asymptotically flat solution
Somewhat surprisingly, given a solution of the near-horizon
attractor equations for the vector moduli as a function of the
charges, it is possible to actually construct the full
asymptotically flat solution with generic values for the moduli at
infinity. Here we will concentrate only on the spherically symmetric
case, although generic exact multi-center solutions are also known
{{cite:aea11133-db40-43c2-bb83-cfa0aceefb98}}.
Due to spherical symmetry, the metric must take the form
(REF ). The insight of
{{cite:856f1c33-6546-49c4-955c-4d0e67e564a7}}, {{cite:3af7fcde-239e-4bc4-b360-693aa46debac}}, {{cite:547a5ff8-1543-4fe9-9b75-1ca6a5be9b38}}, was to notice that
the moduli fields that satisfy the BPS equations of motion
{{cite:7628ffd6-7958-4fc7-bbfe-f6b155b3c869}} must obey equations that are very similar to
the attractor equations (REF ) and (REF ), just that
they hold throughout spacetime, and not only at the horizon of the black
hole
FORMULA 
Here FORMULA  are harmonic functions on flat
FORMULA  sourced by the charges FORMULA . It follows
that whenever one can solve the attractor equations (which is
generally a difficult task), one can also get the solution for the
moduli everywhereWhen the attractor equations are not
analytically soluble, spacetime solutions can still be explicitly
written in terms of the implicit attractor solutions.. This is done
with the aid of the entropy function, FORMULA , defined as
FORMULA 
By comparison with (REF ), we see that near the horizon FORMULA . Away
from the horizon, FORMULA  is simply given by making the replacement
FORMULA 
in the
entropy formula FORMULA . The
constants FORMULA  can be determined from the asymptotic
values of the moduli. Finally, the solution for the metric and the
moduli is
FORMULA 
This is a very powerful result,
since it allows us to reconstruct the solution for the metric and
moduli throughout spacetime from just knowledge of the entropy
as a function of the charges and the asymptotic values of the
moduli.
There is a catch though, in that even if the entropy itself is real,
the entropy function is not guaranteed to be so. FORMULA  is a
quartic polynomial in FORMULA , which is positive as FORMULA , but there is nothing to prevent it from becoming negative
for an intermediate range of FORMULA , if we tune the moduli at infinity
appropriately. Since FORMULA  is a metric component, the solution
becomes unphysical if it becomes imaginary. Therefore one must
always check whether our formal solution is actually physical by
making sure that FORMULA  is real and the moduli FORMULA  belong
to the physical moduli space for all values of the radius.
Even if the asymptotic moduli are outside the regions for which the single-centred solution exists, the respective BPS
state might still be realized as a black hole (or point particle)
bound state {{cite:217b7bc3-26b8-42ef-a565-8c4e2441d4d8}}. The entropy function can be adapted {{cite:aea11133-db40-43c2-bb83-cfa0aceefb98}} to describe these
multicenter supersymmetric black holes. One
simply allows the harmonic functions to have poles at the location
of each black hole carrying the corresponding charge. These
solutions have many interesting properties and applications
{{cite:c56394e0-a6f3-4261-a044-89fe22e4e40d}}, {{cite:217b7bc3-26b8-42ef-a565-8c4e2441d4d8}}, {{cite:c1d61850-7dc0-4bb2-802d-89bf90954fe2}}, {{cite:03cf369c-1848-401b-bdba-012ba2570baa}}, {{cite:03ac89a9-988c-4444-be61-e30f7d713fc0}}, {{cite:23193c04-16fd-4908-b3dc-43057dd6d8ff}}, {{cite:61f048b8-7ec8-44b5-ac03-d360ce0867de}},
but are outside the scope of these lectures.
Note that checking the reality of FORMULA  in the case of
multicenter solutions is an extremely difficult task even for simple
Calabi-Yaus, which could only be tackled numerically.
Simple example redux
As an example, let us again take the D4-D0 black
hole, but now in a Calabi-Yau compactification that has only one complex Kähler modulus FORMULA , where FORMULA  denotes position in FORMULA , and the triple self-intersection number of the Calabi-Yau is FORMULA .
The entropy is then FORMULA . The entropy function is
FORMULA 
where the harmonic functions
are
FORMULA 
The solution for the modulus in this case is purely imaginary
FORMULA 
so now we only need to
determine the constants FORMULA  in terms of the asymptotic value of
the modulus FORMULA  (here the physical
moduli space is the lower half plane). We choose a gauge so that as
FORMULA  the scale factor FORMULA , which imposes the
constraint FORMULA . We then get FORMULA , FORMULA .
Note that the asymptotic Kähler class FORMULA  has to be
positive for the solution to exist.
The attractor equations only require that the B-field
(proportional to FORMULA ) at the horizon be zero, but its value at infinity does not have to vanish,
as our solution seems to indicate. Nonzero FORMULA  can be obtained by considering the entropy
function associated to a black hole with additional FORMULA  charges, but in which we take the
corresponding FORMULA .

Generic entropy for cubic prepotential
We now give the formula {{cite:082122c3-40db-4d74-b571-611a304a8074}} for the entropy of
the generic D6-D4-D2-D0 black hole when the prepotential is simply
FORMULA 
Then the entropy of the
black hole with charges FORMULA  is
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is
determined by solving the following equations for a set of variables
 FORMULA
FORMULA 
which for general charges and intersection numbers
are not analytically soluble. In any case, we have
FORMULA 
and
FORMULA 
Please note that our analysis is only valid when the Calabi-Yau is large both at
infinity and at the horizon, since the entropy formula was derived using the
large volume
prepotential (REF ). One has to pay special attention if the attractor flow in question passes
through a region in moduli space where the Calabi-Yau (or some cycle in the Calabi-Yau) is becoming
small, since then instanton corrections to the prepotential become important {{cite:61f048b8-7ec8-44b5-ac03-d360ce0867de}}.
In order for our supergravity analysis to be valid, we also need the FORMULA  curvature to be small
everywhere, which translates into the requirement of large black hole charges.


Higher orders 

Corrections to the FORMULA  action
In this subsection we briefly sketch how the FORMULA  invariant
Lagrangian, including higher curvature corrections, is constructed
using the so-called superconformal tensor calculus
{{cite:caa2eb57-4ce0-4a1a-8e29-29e11c936010}}. The idea is to begin by constructing an action
for FORMULA  conformal supergravity coupled to FORMULA  conformal
vector multiplets and then gauge-fix it down to Poincaré
supergravity coupled to FORMULA  vector multiplets. The advantage of
this approach relies on the fact that more symmetries are realized
in a linear and simple way in conformal supergravity, and also the
off-shell multiplets are smallerIndeed the simplifications
are so striking one suspects there may be some deeper physical
significance underlying this "mathematical trick".. The basic
ingredients are two types of superconformal multiplets

the Weyl multiplet, which contains the vierbein FORMULA  and the
two gravitini, among many other auxiliary fields. To incorporate it
into the action, one actually has to construct an FORMULA  chiral
multiplet FORMULA , which contains the gauge-invariant field
strengthsVery roughly, the highest component of FORMULA  is
the antiselfdual part of the Weyl tensor squared, while the lowest
component is the square of the antiselfdual part FORMULA  of an
auxiliary tensor field FORMULA  that gets identified with the graviphoton
upon gauge-fixing.

FORMULA  vector multiplets, each containing a scalar FORMULA , a gaugino FORMULA  and a gauge field FORMULA , among other stuff. One of these vector multiplets will provide the graviphoton for the Poincaré gravity multiplet, since the Weyl multiplet does not contain an independent gauge field.

The action for the vector multiplets FORMULA  (where
boldface type denotes a superfield) is constructed by taking a
holomorphic function FORMULA  and integrating it over
FORMULA  superspace. Dilation invariance requires that FORMULA  be
homogenous of degree two in the FORMULA . To recover minimal
supergravity we should only consider one vector multiplet FORMULA ,
for which the prepotential is FORMULA . Integrating
over superspace we obtain
FORMULA 
Upon conformal
gauge-fixing FORMULA =const this gives rise to the Einstein-Hilbert term.
The Maxwell term comes about in the usual way
{{cite:05e3a0bc-39a8-4b7f-ace8-88daa74ebd38}}. A similar mechanism will give rise to
the Einstein-Hilbert, Maxwell and scalar terms in the non-minimal
action. Note that we will get only FORMULA  scalars out of the initial
FORMULA , since one combination gets gauge-fixed to a constant.
In order to include higher curvature terms in the Lagrangian, one
has to add couplings to the chiral multiplet FORMULA . This is achieved
by simply extending the holomorphic prepotential to also be a
function of FORMULA , FORMULA , which can be expanded as
FORMULA 
The FORMULA  are now required to be homogenous of
degree FORMULA . Quite interestingly, they are related to topological
string genus FORMULA  amplitudes, as we will explore later in these
notes.

Wald's formula
The Bekenstein-Hawking area law for the macroscopic entropy of a
black hole was derived in Einstein gravity. It cannot possibly
remain exactly valid when higher
curvature
corrections to the action are included, as the area is not invariant under field redefinitions (e.g. which mix
FORMULA  and FORMULA ), while the entropy must be. It was
shown in {{cite:c44783e1-085c-48e8-b113-40872cab621c}}, {{cite:5f1f7519-a29f-48cb-bf2f-25cfe3371f08}} how the area law has to
be modified in the presence of FORMULA  or higher derivative terms in
the Einstein action in order that the first law of black hole
mechanics - the spacetime manifestation of the first law of
thermodynamics - remain valid. The first law of black hole mechanics
can be put in the usual form
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the surface gravity
on the horizon, if FORMULA  is given byThis is the correct
formula in the case in which the effective action contains powers of
the Riemann tensor, but no derivatives thereof.
FORMULA 
Here FORMULA  is the binormal to the horizon FORMULA  and
FORMULA  is the volume element on FORMULA . Note that if the
Lagrangian only consists of the Einstein-Hilbert term, then FORMULA 
equals the area of the horizon, but FORMULA  and higher curvature
corrections to the action do generically modify the area law.
Thus, upon adding higher curvature terms to the FORMULA  supergravity action,
the entropy of the black hole solutions gets modified in two ways: first, the metric on
the horizon changes as a consequence of the modified equations of motion. Second, the entropy
formula itself receives corrections according to (REF ).
The case that concerns us - of BPS black holes in FORMULA  supergravity
coupled to vector multiplets - was considered
in {{cite:b1155b8b-1510-432d-a180-451904da46ea}}, {{cite:101473f5-7969-4462-8d3e-243e592cde16}}, {{cite:4215a600-2a64-4900-a3ba-efae92d110f4}}, {{cite:487e4463-4cd5-438f-83bd-dfad47877324}}, {{cite:a4a41483-0e7b-48a7-a935-49ab54b06fb8}}. The authors
argued that after adding the terms (REF ) to the FORMULA  supergravity action, the near horizon geometry was still FORMULA , and that the moduli were still subject to an attractor
mechanism. Their horizon values were fixed by the following
generalisation of the attractor equations
FORMULA 
FORMULA 
where now FORMULA  is the derivative of the full
corrected prepotential FORMULA . Taking into account the combined effect of the metric backreaction and
Wald's corrections to the area
law, the expression for the entropy becomes
FORMULA 
evaluated on the horizon. In lecture 3 we will
use this result to match the perturbative expansion of the black
hole partition function to the perturbative expansion of the
topological string.

The MSW CFT
In this subsection we discuss the CFT duals known for a large class
of Calabi-Yau black holes. Finding the dual for the most general
case is a very interesting unsolved problem. A dual
CFT description {{cite:58c216f6-ce39-4b29-9914-bb0451c68c37}} (often known as the MSW CFT) has been proposed in the still fairly general case
in which the D6 charge is zero, but the D4-D2-D0 charges and the Calabi-Yau itself
are (almost)
arbitrary. We will denote the charges by FORMULA  and the intersection numbers of the Calabi-Yau FORMULA 
by FORMULA . As before, we define FORMULA .
Upon lifting to M-theory, the D4-D2-D0 brane configuration
becomes an M5-brane wrapped on FORMULA , where the surface  FORMULAThe charges must be such that FORMULA  is very ample
{{cite:58c216f6-ce39-4b29-9914-bb0451c68c37}},
which is the case if the Kähler class is large. is holomorphically embedded in FORMULA  (as a consequence of supersymmetry)
and FORMULA  stands for the M-theory circle all throughout this lecture. FORMULA  decomposes as FORMULA  where FORMULA  is an integral basis of
4-cycles on FORMULA . The M5 carries worldvolume fluxes that give rise to
induced M2-brane charges (FORMULA ), as well as FORMULA  units of momentum along the FORMULA .
From the supergravity point of
view, under the M-theory lift the D4-D2-D0 black hole becomes an FORMULA -wrapped
black string, whose near
horizon geometry is locally FORMULA . Note that the
M-theory lift of a D6-brane is Taub-Nut space,
so if we considered black holes with D6 charge the eleven-dimensional geometry would no longer be FORMULA ,
which is partly the reason that a microscopic description is not known in that caseQuite surprisingly,
the MSW string remakes its appearance for certain black holes with nonzero D6 charge {{cite:f5e4d9f0-cb58-4eaa-b523-1a3862b5e22d}}, which may
imply that all IIA black holes are described by some deformation of the MSW CFT. This makes it all the
more worth studying, of course..
The low energy dynamics on the M5 worldvolume is captured by an effective FORMULA  CFT living on
FORMULA  (time). This FORMULA  CFT has FORMULA  supersymmetry, inherited via dimensional
reduction from the FORMULA  supersymmetry of the FORMULA  theory living on the M5 worldvolume.
Its low-energy excitations arise as zero-modes of the fluctuations of the M5 worldvolume
fields (embedding, self-dual 3-form FORMULA  and the right-moving (RM) FORMULA  fermions FORMULA ) on FORMULA , as follows

zero-mode fluctuations of the embedding correspond to cohomology classes on FORMULA .

zero-modes of the FORMULA -field correspond to self-and anti-self-dual forms on FORMULA , as can be seen from the decomposition
FORMULA 
If the 2-form FORMULA  is self-dual, then the self-duality of FORMULA 
implies that the scalar modulus FORMULA  has to be right-moving,
while if FORMULA  is anti-self-dual, then FORMULA  is left-moving.
Thus we obtain FORMULA  LM and FORMULA  RM scalars in the CFT from the
dimensional reduction of the FORMULA -field, where FORMULA  are the
numbers of self-dual and respectively anti-self-dual two-forms on FORMULA .

fermions in the CFT arise from FORMULA  forms on FORMULA  and they are RM. This can be easily seen
by decomposing the FORMULA  RM fermions as
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  are fermionic zero-modes on FORMULA , which are known to
be in one-to-one correspondence with harmonic FORMULA 
forms.There are no left-moving fermions because they would
be in one-to-one correspondence with FORMULA  forms on FORMULA , of which
there are none since FORMULA . The number of RM fermions
is FORMULA  and it can be shown to equal the number of RM
bosons, as required by supersymmetry on the right.

there is one distinguished FORMULA  multiplet in the FORMULA  CFT,
called the centre of mass multiplet. Its bosonic content is
given by the three massless scalars FORMULA  that parameterize the
motion of the black hole as a whole in the three noncompact
directions and one right-moving mode FORMULA  of the FORMULA  field,
which corresponds to the unique self-dual form on FORMULA  which is
extendible to a 2-form on FORMULA . This is of course the pullback of the
Kähler form on FORMULA  - FORMULA  - which has to be proportional to FORMULA 
at the horizon, as a consequence of the attractor equations. In
terms of the scalars  FORMULA
FORMULA 
The fermionic parteners of these four bosons are
the goldstinoes FORMULA 
that arise from the four supersymmetries
broken by the brane configuration.

The resulting central charges, including a
subleading correction proportional to the second Chern class of FORMULA ,
are {{cite:58c216f6-ce39-4b29-9914-bb0451c68c37}}
FORMULA 
The MSW CFT reproduces the area-entropy law. If one is only
interested in the D4-D0 system, then the left-moving oscillator
momentum is FORMULA , while the right-moving oscillator momentum has to
be zero by supersymmetry. Using Cardy's formula, the entropy reads
FORMULA 
in
agreement with the macroscopic formula (REF ).
What happens if we add D2/M2 charges? This corresponds to turning on
M2 brane fluxes (that is, nonzero FORMULA  flux on cycles of the
form FORMULA , with FORMULA  a two-cycle on FORMULA ) on the M5
worldvolume. In the effective FORMULA  theory, membrane charge is the
zero-mode momentum FORMULA  carried by the massless
scalars that arise from the dimensional reduction of the three-form
FORMULA , and thus it is a vector in the Narain lattice of massless
scalars. FORMULA  contributes to the FORMULA  momentum along the string.
The effect is to shift the momentum available to be distributed
among the LM oscillators by
FORMULA 
FORMULA  is the inverse of the matrix of charges FORMULA . The entropy gets modified to FORMULA , and it is straightforward to check that this agrees with the
supergravity formula (REF ) for FORMULA =0.

 The (modified) elliptic genus
So far we have been loosely speaking about the “entropy” of the
black hole and its CFT dual. In fact, what we are really looking for
is a BPS protected quantity which does not change as one
extrapolates between the supergravity and CFT regimes. Such an
object is the (modified) elliptic genus, which is an index that
counts a weighted number of ground states. At leading order (given
by the area law), which quantity we use seems not to matter
muchPresumably what happens is that one or both of FORMULA 
and FORMULA  are proportional to FORMULA , but with different
proportionality constants, so that the difference between the log of
the total number of states and the log of the index is subleading.,
but at subleading orders we will definitely need to be more
precise.Actually, the first subleading correction to the
entropy is included in (REF ) expression and matches
{{cite:58c216f6-ce39-4b29-9914-bb0451c68c37}}: on the microscopic side it involved the
FORMULA  correction to the central charge, and on the
macroscopic side it came from the Gauss-Bonnet term in the FORMULA 
effective action.
Let us give a very simple example of what an index is
{{cite:871d3f2c-2c0b-4f88-9c38-d1b1167f9a74}}. Take supersymmetric quantum mechanics with one
supercharge FORMULA  (FORMULA ), and define the Witten index as
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the
fermion number operator. Since for states of nonzero energy FORMULA , FORMULA  is a state with the same energy but
opposite fermion number (mod 2), FORMULA  only gets contributions from
the ground states, since they are annihilated by FORMULA  and thus are
not paired. If we denote by FORMULA  and FORMULA  the number of bosonic
and respectively fermionic ground states, then FORMULA .
The index is rigid under small deformations of the parameters in the
Hamiltonian.
This simple index actually vanishes for the MSW CFT
{{cite:e1b1e534-b3a2-40a8-af69-b466865e4503}}, {{cite:4b9e91fb-7afa-400c-a53a-d2a97648d0ef}}, whose symmetry algebra on the right is a
Wigner contraction of the large FORMULA  superconformal algebra. This
consists of a small FORMULA  superconformal algebra plus four bosonic
and four fermionic generators, which are nothing but the fields in
the center-of-mass multiplet FORMULA . This
multiplet has equal numbers of bosonic and fermionic excitations and
hence gives a prefactor of zero for the Witten index.
The generators of the small FORMULA  are four supercurrents FORMULA , three bosonic currents FORMULA  that
generate a level FORMULA  FORMULA  Kač-Moody algebra, and the usual Virasoro generators with central charge FORMULA . We
have as usual two choices of boundary conditions for the fermionic operators, periodic (R) or antiperiodic (NS).
The small FORMULA  generators have certain commutation relations
{{cite:4b9e91fb-7afa-400c-a53a-d2a97648d0ef}} with the
fermionic operators FORMULA  and FORMULA .
We will only need the R-sector commutators
FORMULA 
We wish to define an index which is nonvanishing for MSW. Consider
the following table of the R sector ground states for the center of
mass multipletHere we have chosen the ground state to satisfy FORMULA .
TABLE 
From this we see that a modified index that will not vanish due to
the trivial contribution of the center of mass multiplet can be
achieved by evaluating instead the trace of FORMULA , as shown in the third line of the table. It is an
easy exercise to check that for states FORMULA  for which all
FORMULA  the contributions from the
various members of the supermultiplet cancel, so the modified trace
defines a new index.
Interesting subtleties arise for the case in which only some of the
supercharges annihilate the state. Consider for example a state that
carries charges  FORMULA
FORMULA 
Acting with FORMULA  on FORMULA  will produce states proportional to FORMULA , as can be checked using the commutation relations
(REF )
FORMULA 
This is simply the statement that FORMULA 
preserves the supersymmetries nonlinearily, as we discussed before.
As far as the index is concerned, the arithmetics is the same as for
the Ramond ground states; in particular, FORMULA  (in our random convention), and the contribution to the
modified index is again 1.
Finally, we can refine our index by introducing potentials FORMULA  for
the FORMULA  conserved FORMULA  charges. The resulting index is
called the modified elliptic genus of the MSW CFT
FORMULA 
Here FORMULA  and the fermion number
is
FORMULA 
If only RM
ground states contributed to the index, then FORMULA  would be a
holomorphic function of FORMULA , but due to the contribution of the
states of the form (REF ), some dependence on FORMULA  is
also introduced, since
FORMULA 
Nevertheless, this
dependence is entirely due to the RM boson in the center-of-mass
multiplet, so it is under control. In fact, it can be shown
{{cite:9364bed5-f59d-4329-be04-718e3015f655}} that the FORMULA  dependence of the
elliptic genus is entirely of the form
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA  are
lattice theta-functions and the sum has a finite number of
terms.
To see how (REF ) comes about, recall that the FORMULA - dimensional lattice
lattice FORMULA  is a sublattice of the larger FORMULA -dimensional lattice FORMULA  of
FORMULA  zero modes on the FORMULA . Consider the unit
cell FORMULA  of FORMULA  in FORMULA , drawn in figure 6.
Let FORMULA  be a shift of the lattice FORMULA  by a lattice
vector FORMULA , and let FORMULA  be the lattice of vectors
in FORMULA  normal to vectors in FORMULA  (this corresponds to directions
in FORMULA  perpendicular to the plane of the figure). It is clear that one can
rewrite the partition sum in FORMULA  as a sum over
FORMULA , where FORMULA  runs over the points in
FORMULA , a total of FORMULA  of them. The sum over FORMULA 
gives a FORMULA -function that encodes the FORMULA  and FORMULA  dependence,
while the contribution from FORMULA  is clearly holomorphic.
We note that (REF ) was used to derive an exact expression
for the elliptic genus in some special cases {{cite:4b9e91fb-7afa-400c-a53a-d2a97648d0ef}}.
FIGURE 
At last, let us mention the existence of a spectral flow
automorphism of the FORMULA  algebra, which acts the following way on
the bosonic generators:
FORMULA 
If the flow parameter
FORMULA  is integer the spectral flow acts on the NS and R sectors
separately, while if FORMULA  is half-integer, the NS and R sectors
get interchanged. Hence the elliptic genus (REF ) can also be
computed as a trace over the NS sector of the appropriately shifted
variables
FORMULA 
Now
the contributions will come from the NS states that are related by
spectral flow to the Ramond ground states. These are the chiral
primaries and have FORMULA . Supergravity in
FORMULA  (or a quotient thereof) oftentimes produces NS boundary
conditions for the fermions in the CFT living on the boundary torus.
The trace over chiral primaries is then a more natural thing to
compute from the supergravity perspective.


The topological string 
In this lecture we briefly review what the A-model topological
string is and computes, and describe the Gromov-Witten (GW)
invariants. The many details omitted here
can be found for example
in
{{cite:1adedbcf-07c2-463c-b89d-ba0bd46a35f1}}, {{cite:106006b4-95eb-44b3-8102-5ea854c21037}}, {{cite:4606f09e-b8cf-4422-8cfe-85102a2058f5}}, {{cite:bd36286d-da79-4c3c-bc8e-4f25acad864e}}, {{cite:79b2150e-8dcf-46b0-89c4-17c18f6f1981}}, {{cite:45b941a6-b40e-44b7-9efa-3aec4ab6beae}}.
Twisting the string
The topological string is obtained by twisting an FORMULA 
superconformal FORMULA  sigma-model and coupling to FORMULA  gravity. We
will start with just an untwisted FORMULA  FORMULA -model and build
our way up to the A-model topological string. Due to the high amount
of supersymmetry, the target space FORMULA  of the FORMULA -model is
required to be Kähler. The action is then
FORMULA 
where the coupling constant
FORMULA  sitting in front of the action can be thought of as
FORMULA .
The FORMULA  algebra has four worldsheet currents FORMULA , with spins
FORMULA  (and their antiholomorphic counterparts, denoted by tilde).
FORMULA  is the energy-momentum tensor, FORMULA  is the FORMULA  FORMULA -symmetry current of the FORMULA 
algebra, and FORMULA  are the conserved supercurrents for the two worldsheet supersymmetries; the FORMULA  superscript denotes their FORMULA -charge. From the FORMULA  algebra, the relations that are relevant to our discussion are the R-sector anticommutators
FORMULA 
One can combine the two possible FORMULA -symmetries into a vector
and an axial current FORMULA , FORMULA .
After quantising the theory, the quantum measure is invariant under
the axial FORMULA -symmetry only if FORMULA  is a Calabi-Yau manifold (of any
dimension, so far), as it must satisfy
FORMULA 
Next, we would like to make our FORMULA -model topological, which
means that the observables in the theory should only depend on the
topological data of the target space FORMULA . A way to accomplish this
is by constructing a fermionic symmetry - generated by a
(scalarThe reason that we need a scalar supercharge is
that we would like our model to be defined for a worldsheet FORMULA  of
arbitrary curvature and genus. If FORMULA  is fermionic, then the
supersymmetry parameter FORMULA  has to be a Killing spinor on FORMULA ,
which in general does not exist. If FORMULA  is scalar though, then FORMULA 
is a Grassmann scalar, which exists for any worldsheet.) BRST
charge FORMULA , which is nilpotent - so that FORMULA . The physical
operators in the topological theory are then defined to be FORMULA 
cohomology classes. Ultimately we will identify FORMULA  with a
cohomology operator on FORMULA , such that the theory becomes
topological. We further require the energy-momentum tensor to be
FORMULA -exact in order to ensure the independence of topological
correlation functions of the FORMULA  worldsheet metric. All this is
accomplished by twisting according to
FORMULA 
and taking FORMULA . This shifts the spin of the various
operators by an amount proportional to their FORMULA -charge
FORMULA 
In particular, now FORMULA  and FORMULA  have spin 1,
while FORMULA  and FORMULA  have spin 2. Thus FORMULA  can act
as our BRST charge, and FORMULA . Next we need to
couple the FORMULA -model to a worldsheet metric FORMULA  and then
perform the path integral over FORMULA  too. In order to define
string amplitudes, it is quite useful to note that the structure of
the twisted FORMULA  algebra is isomorphic to the structure we obtain
by applying the BRST procedure to the usual bosonic string. The
correspondence between the various operators is
FORMULA 
Remember that if we want to compute genus FORMULA  amplitudes in the
bosonic string we need to integrate over the moduli space FORMULA  of
genus FORMULA  Riemann surfaces, with FORMULA  insertions of the FORMULA  ghost
(for FORMULA ), which provide the measure. In view of the
correspondence between FORMULA  and the FORMULA  ghost, we define the genus
FORMULA  topological string amplitude asFor FORMULA  see
e.g.{{cite:4606f09e-b8cf-4422-8cfe-85102a2058f5}}, {{cite:a6b0fcae-1ce3-41b8-941a-29ca8bebf993}}, {{cite:1adedbcf-07c2-463c-b89d-ba0bd46a35f1}}. Note
that the counterpart of the FORMULA  ghost could be either
FORMULA  or FORMULA , depending on the twist we perform
for the RM. Here we have made the choice corresponding to the
A-model topological string.
FORMULA 
where FORMULA 
are Beltrami differentials, parametrising complex structure
deformations of the moduli space of genus FORMULA  Riemann surfaces in
FORMULA . It turns out that “ghost” charge conservation makes almost
all FORMULA  vanish, unless we take the complex dimension of FORMULA  to be
three. Therefore the case in which FORMULA  is a Calabi-Yau three-fold
provides the richest examples, which we will assume from now on.
The topological string “free energy” is defined as a perturbative
expansion in the topological string coupling constant,  FORMULA
FORMULA 
The topological string partition function is
FORMULA 
Note that one could have equally considered a twist of the form FORMULA . In that case FORMULA  would become the BRST
operator. Since we can do independent twists for the LM and for the
RM, we end up with two inequivalent possible topological string
theories, depending on which supercurrent becomes the BRST charge
FORMULA 
As advertised, in these notes we will only concentrate on
the A-model topological string.

The A-model topological string
The A-model twist is
FORMULA 
which shifts the spins as
FORMULA 
The local observables in the
theory are in one-to-one correspondence with the de Rham cohomology
classes on FORMULA . Correlation functions only receive contributions
from configurations that satisfy the classical equations of motion,
which in the A-model are holomorphic maps from the string worldsheet to the target
space. The action can be written as a FORMULA -exact term (which does
not contribute) plus
FORMULA 
where FORMULA 
are the wrapping numbers of the image of the string worldsheet
FORMULA  around the various 2-cycles dual to FORMULA  and
FORMULA  are the
complexified Kähler moduli of the Calabi-Yau . We also set FORMULA . To compute the topological string partition function,
we need to integrate over the moduli space FORMULA  of maps
from a genus FORMULA  Riemann surface to the Calabi-Yau FORMULA  - where the
image belongs to the homology class FORMULA  of FORMULA , weigh it by
the exponential of minus the euclidean action (REF ), and
then sum over genera. From (REF ) it is clear that the
A-model topological string only depends on half the information of
the Calabi-Yau - that is - only on the Kähler structure.
The Gromov-Witten invariants FORMULA  are
defined as the expansion coefficients in
FORMULA 
which
encode the contributions which are nonperturbative in FORMULA .
FORMULA  is roughly the euler character of FORMULA .
There are also perturbative contributions to FORMULA , that are not
encoded in FORMULA . These contributions can be computed in just
low-energy field theory, and are only present at genus 0 and 1
FORMULA 
 FORMULAWhat the topological string computes
Recall from our discussion in section (2.7) that higher curvature
corrections to the FORMULA  supergravity action in FORMULA  are encoded in
a holomorphic function of the vector moduli and the Weyl multiplet
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  and
FORMULA  are the self-dual and anti-self-dual parts of the
graviphoton and Weyl tensor respectively. In usual string theory,
such a contribution to the effective action can be computed by
evaluating the correlation function of two graviton and FORMULA 
graviphoton vertex operators on a genus FORMULA  string worldsheet. This
computation has been performed in {{cite:a374cfed-3bd7-4596-919c-f87b4fbdac63}} and it
was found that the amplitude for this scattering process is
precisely given by the genus FORMULA  topological string amplitude FORMULA .
FIGURE 

The OSV conjecture
In lecture 2 we discussed black hole attractors in the context of
type IIA string theory compactified on a Calabi-Yau FORMULA . We found
that the entropy of these black holes only depended on the
Kähler moduli of the compactification, which in turn are fixed
to their attractor values at the horizon of the black hole. Also,
remember that hypermultiplet scalars - which in type IIA correspond
to the complex structure deformations of FORMULA  - completely dropped
out of the story. Interestingly, in the A-model topological string
half of the information on the Calabi-Yau data also drops out due to
the twist.
This is a first clue towards a connection between
attractor black holes and topological strings: they are both
functions on half of the Calabi-Yau moduli space. It would be
strange if in string theory we had two natural functions of the same
variables that were not related in some simple way. Indeed we shall
see that, when the comparison between the two quantities is properly
formulated, the relation between the indexed black hole entropy and
topological string partition functions appears to take the simplest
imaginable form.
Mixed partition functions
If we want to make an exact or all orders comparison between the
partition functions of two systems, we must first be precise about
exactly which ensemble we are using. A statistical system or
ensemble can be characterized either by conserved quantities such as
the energy FORMULA  or by conjugate potentials such as the inverse
temperature FORMULA . There are associated microcanonical and
canonical partition functions FORMULA  and FORMULA , , which for the case
of energy and temperature are related by
FORMULA 
More generally, if there are many
conserved charges/potentials, partition functions can be defined in
which some variables are treated canonically and others
microcanonically. We refer to these as mixed partition
functions associated to mixed ensembles.
For every type of (mixed) ensemble there is an associated definition
of entropy. For example, in the microcanonical ensemble the entropy
is defined as
FORMULA 
while in the
canonical ensemble it is defined by
FORMULA 
To leading order in the saddle point
approximation one has
FORMULA 
with FORMULA . However in general, for a
finite system and beyond leading order, FORMULA  and FORMULA  are not
related as simply as in (REF ) - by just a change of variables.
Rather, an integral transform is needed. Hence if we want to discuss
subleading corrections to the entropy we must specify exactly which
ensemble we are using to define the entropy. It is meaningless to
give an all-orders formula for the entropy without this
specification.
So the question arises: exactly which entropy does Wald's formula,
discussed in section 2.7.2, compute? Wald's derivation is
ultimately based on a quantum field theory analysis. The answer then
follows from the fact that in quantum field theory the boundary
conditions amount to an implicit choice of ensemble. For example, if
we sum over geometries with asymptotic periodicity FORMULA , we are
working in the canonical fixed-temperature ensemble. There is no
field theory path integral formulation for the microcanonical
ensemble. The best we can do is a Laplace transform
FORMULA 
which requires knowledge of FORMULA 
for all FORMULA . So for a finite-temperature black hole Wald's formula
computes FORMULA  rather than FORMULA .
What about charges? For electromagnetic charges, instead of fixing
the radius of the circle at infinity, in the field theory path
integral one fixes the boundary value of the field FORMULA  (the
electric Wilson line) at infinity, as well as the topological class
of the gauge field. This corresponds to fixing the magnetic charge
FORMULA  while summing over all electric charges with weights FORMULA . Hence field theory gives a mixed ensemble which treats
electric charges canonically and magnetic charges microcanonically.
This then is the ensemble in which the entropy computed by Wald's
formula is definedSee also {{cite:d31dbe7f-a469-4cc6-8e51-57b3db4b9e19}} for
a discussion of thermoodynamic ensembles.. We will see this is
crucial for comparison of Wald's formula for the entropy to the
topological string partition function.
We note that an independent but similar issue is whether or not the
the ensemble is weighted with minus signs for fermions. This is
again related to path integral boundary conditions and is discussed
below.

Brute force derivation of OSV
Now we would like to get to work and compute the corrections to the
entropy, using Wald's formula. The first question is, which terms
from the corrected FORMULA  action do actually contribute. The working
assumption has been {{cite:101473f5-7969-4462-8d3e-243e592cde16}}Reference
{{cite:101473f5-7969-4462-8d3e-243e592cde16}} does not address all the issued involved
and this point remains in need of further clarification. Some
relevant, but still incomplete, observations are made section 4.3.1
below. that if we compute the indexed entropy - defined in the
usual way as a Legendre transform of the supersymmetry-protected
indexed partition function (more precisely, the modified elliptic
genus (REF )) that there is a (perturbative)
nonrenormalization theorem implying that it receives contributions
only from supersymmetry-protected terms in the effective action.
These are the terms which involve integrals over only a chiral half
of superspace and so cannot involve hypermultiplets. Hence we expect
that only terms in the action that are built exclusively out of
vector multiplets can correct the entropy. These are given of course
by (REF ), and their contribution to the entropy has been
quoted in section 2.7
FORMULA 
Naively, one might evaluate the FORMULA 
at their attractor values (REF ) and (REF ) and view
this as an expression for the entropy as a function of the magnetric
and electic charges FORMULA  and FORMULA . However, according to the
discussion of the previous section, this is not correct:
(REF ) comes from a mixed ensemble and should be viewed as a
function of the magnetic charges FORMULA  and the electric
potentials, which shall be identified shortly as FORMULA .
The above expression for the entropy
can be rewritten in a nicer form by using the homogeneity property of the prepotentialFORMULA . and the attractor equations
FORMULA 
which let us eliminate FORMULA  and
FORMULA  in favor of FORMULA  and FORMULA . In terms of FORMULA  and
the imaginary part of FORMULA  this is
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA 
The second half of the attractor
equations then reads
FORMULA 
which implies that FORMULA  is obtained from FORMULA  in
exactly the same way that the entropy is obtained from the logarithm of
the mixed partition function. Namely, FORMULA  can be thought of as the Legendre transform with
respect to the canonical variables only
FORMULA 
provided that the
FORMULA  are indeed identified as the conjugate potentials to the
electric charges FORMULA .
In conclusion, FORMULA  is the logarithm of the partition function computed in a mixed
ensemble, in which one fixes the magnetic charges and electric
potentials at infinity. We will loosely refer to FORMULA  as the free
energy though strictly speaking it differs by a factor of FORMULA 
from the usual definition.
One relatively illuminating way to write the mixed free energy is by
picking a gauge in which FORMULA , where FORMULA  is the graviphoton
charge. Then, using the homogeneity properties of FORMULA , we have
FORMULA 
which shows very clearly the perturbative nature of FORMULA  as
an expansion around large graviphoton charge. Now, the topological
string partition function is also defined by a perturbative
expansion in FORMULA  (REF ) and, as mentioned in section
2.7, it is proportional to the supergravity prepotential FORMULA . By comparing the first two terms (REF ) in the
expansions of the two prepotentials, one can fix all normalizations
and finds
FORMULA 
with the following correspondence between the
arguments on the two sides of the equation For a D4-D2-D0
black hole, in the large-charge, large Calabi-Yau volume
approximation, FORMULA  if we uniformly scale up the charges of
the black hole. This is consistent with the fact that we are
performing a perturbative expansion in the topological string
coupling constant.
FORMULA 
From (REF ) one finds
FORMULA 
which can be
written in the more expressive form
FORMULA 
with the variables
identified as in (REF ). As there are several assumptions
that went in to the derivation of (REF ) it is known as the
OSV conjecture. It is important to note that the conjecture is a
statement about the equality of two perturbation expansions. Indeed
at the nonperturbative level it is not clear how either side of
(REF ) is even defined.
Note that the factor of `2' in the exponent of (REF ) was
obtained by the brute force method – just carefully keeping track
of all normalizations. So far there is no hint as to why it should
not equal 1 or 17 or any other real number. Such a simple relation
demands a simple physical explanation, which we will provide in the
next section.

Why  FORMULA
In this section we will give a heuristic explanation of why the two
complex conjugate factors FORMULA  and FORMULA  appear in the
black hole partition function. The goal here is not to give a
perturbative proof of the OSV conjecture – many points would have
to be filled in and clarified – but rather to provide a compelling
physical pictureWe follow here {{cite:096c29cb-35df-4168-b1d9-fc0331a86b3a}},
which in turn built on earlier discussions in
{{cite:c42b1792-6ef0-4103-887f-7e6d5c98b195}}, {{cite:ee9a77bf-3d3c-4855-9edf-89451a6b0756}}, {{cite:7360a9f9-667e-4cd3-9a70-d4b4fef871a9}}, {{cite:61f048b8-7ec8-44b5-ac03-d360ce0867de}}..
The basic idea is simply to evaluate the black hole partition
function in a string perturbation expansion around a euclidean
saddle point, which is a euclideanized attractor geometry (and then
compare it to the perturbation expansion for the topological
string). It is then argued that at FORMULA  loops, string perturbation
theory is saturated by genus FORMULA  worldsheet (anti)instantons which
wrap (anti)holomorphic cycles in the Calabi-Yau and localize to the
(south) north pole of the horizon FORMULA . This is possible due to the
peculiarities of the FORMULA  supersymmetries, which are
broken in exactly the same way for an instanton at the north pole
and an anti-instatnon at the south pole. The two factors in FORMULA 
then come form the instanton sum at the north pole and and the
anti-instanton sum at the south pole.
FORMULA -theory lift
Our starting point will be the IIA string partition function
-denoted FORMULA  - on the euclidean attractor geometry. As will be
seen explicitly below, the sum over worldsheets gives a finite
non-zero answer. Furthermore, there must be many supersymmetric
cancellations, as in the limit in which the FORMULA 
radius goes to infinity the term which scales as volume is the
cosmological constant and must vanish.
So the question arises - what is FORMULA  computing? Since the
computation involves a choice of attractor geometry, it should be
related to the associated black hole. Since it is supersymmetry
protected, it should be some supersymmetry-protected invariant
associated with the black hole. We know of only one such object–the
modified elliptic genus. So the obvious guess is
FORMULA 
Note
that since the left hand side is defined only in string perturbation
theory, this is at best a perturbative relation (at large charges).
If one further assumes FORMULA 
one has FORMULA .
There are a number of ways one might go about demonstrating
(REF ). The most straightforward approach would be to refine
and adapt the methods of {{cite:df242968-4f4b-422d-b267-c716f3726b5a}}, {{cite:1cf30a15-0d1b-465e-a0f2-4c911b161d78}}. The
subtleties would be to carefully understand the euclideanization,
especially of the RR fields which become complex, and the fermion
boundary conditions. Instead of this more direct method,
{{cite:096c29cb-35df-4168-b1d9-fc0331a86b3a}} adopted a shortcut involving a lift to
M-theory. This had the disadvantage of using a nonperturbative
relation to demonstrate a perturbative one, but on the other hand
the construction, which we now review, is illuminating in its own
right.
To keep the equations uncluttered, we just consider the
euclideanised near-horizon geometry of a D4-D0 black hole.
The metric on the FORMULA  part is
FORMULA 
the radii of the FORMULA  and
FORMULA  are equal to
FORMULA 
There is also a graviphoton field
FORMULA 
Note that this potential is
purely imaginary - as expected when we continue electric fields to
euclidean space. Noting that the graviphoton is just the connection
on the M-theory circle (parametrized here by FORMULA ), we simply
end up with the M-theory metric
FORMULA 
We immediately recognise an
FORMULA  factor in the first line of the above equation. Note that
some of the metric components are imaginary, so this is a complexified FORMULA  quotient. The interpretation of this
complexified geometry can be gleaned from looking at the torus that
is located at the boundary FORMULA . Keeping the leading terms in the
metric as we take FORMULA , we find the conformal metric on
the boundary
FORMULA 
This can be put in the
standard form
FORMULA 
if we
take the modulus of the torus parametrised by FORMULA  to
satisfy
FORMULA 
Now, according to
FORMULA , the partition function on this euclidean M-geometry
is a partition function of the MSW CFT on the boundary torus
(REF )
FORMULA 
The
main point we wish to stress here is that FORMULA  appears as a
weighting factor for the left movers only. This result might have
been anticipated from the fact that the lorentzian D4-D0 black hole
is dual to a state in the MSW CFT in which the left movers are
thermally excited but the right movers are in their ground state.
Consideration of the fermion boundary conditions
{{cite:096c29cb-35df-4168-b1d9-fc0331a86b3a}} indicates that, after a spectral flow one
obtains (REF ) with the trace in the R sector and an insertion
of FORMULA . An FORMULA  insertion is needed when the degrees of
freedom corresponding to the center-of-mass multiplet (ignored so
far) are included: without the insertion this multiplet gives a zero
prefactor. In the bulk FORMULA  description these appear as boundary
“singleton” modes. Exactly how this all works out has not been
carefully analyzed and the FORMULA  insertion is accordingly suppressed
in the following.
Of course, the index is defined for fixed electric potentials on the
boundaries, so we need to add D2-brane charges, and then sum over
them. Upon reinstating the D2 potentials FORMULA , the partition function
we are computing becomes
FORMULA 
where here and elsewhere FORMULA  corrections are
implicit.
In order to make the connection with the topological string, it is
useful to rewrite (REF ) in terms of topological string
variables. Using (REF ) for the D4-D2-D0 black hole, we can
rewrite (REF ) as
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA  is just the modified RM fermion number (REF )
needed for modular invariance and FORMULA  is the correct string
instanton action.
In conclusion, string theory on the euclidean attractor geometry is
expected to give a perturbative expansion of the supersymmetric
partition function of the associated black hole.

Computing FORMULA  
Now we must evaluate the perturbative string loop expansion of the
type IIA partition function on the attractor geometry. This
computation could be set up in the NS-R, Green-Schwarz or hybrid
formalism, each of which has its own complementary set of advantages
and disadvantages. In the NS-R formalism the connection to the
topological string is clearest, but RR fluxes are hard to deal with.
In the Green-Schwarz formalism the action in RR backgrounds is
known, but the reduction to the topological string is only partially
worked out {{cite:4420ff77-8317-49dc-9ea4-4bf47ee1b64b}}. The hybrid formalism, as it more
or less treats the FORMULA  spacetime part in the Green-Schwarz language
and the Calabi-Yau part in the NS-R language is perhaps ultimately
the most suitable, but unfortunately it is less developed at
present.
In {{cite:096c29cb-35df-4168-b1d9-fc0331a86b3a}} we have used the Green-Schwarz formalism.
The worldsheet action effectively splits into an internal FORMULA 
term and an external FORMULA  piece, and the computation
factorizes. The details of exactly how the internal piece reproduces
the topological string have not all been completed, but the presumed
equivalence of the Green-Schwarz and NS-R strings imply they must
work out, as shall be assumed herein. Although of interest in their
own right these details are essentially the same in FORMULA  and in an attractor geometry and are not the focus of
our current investigation. Here we focus on the FORMULA 
factor where interesting new features arise.
FIGURE 
Let us now summarize the key steps in the somewhat technical
computation {{cite:096c29cb-35df-4168-b1d9-fc0331a86b3a}}. The classically supersymmetric
genus FORMULA  worldsheets FORMULA  wrap holomorphic cycles (instantons) or
antiholomorphic cycles (anti-instantons) in FORMULA  and sit at any point
in FORMULA . However, as will be important momentarily,
which supersymmetry is preserved depends on the point chosen in
FORMULA . The worldsheet sum is organized as an expansion
about these configurations. The internal part (presumably) gives a
factor of FORMULA , as we will try to sketch below. Afterwards,
we are just left with the ordinary integral of a (-1)-brane
zero-mode action in FORMULA .
The “fields”
consist of the four spacetime coordinates FORMULA , their four
chiral goldstino superpartners FORMULA , FORMULA  fermionic
fields FORMULA  coming from the FORMULA  zero modes of the
canonically conjugate momenta to the FORMULA  on FORMULA , and
possibly some antichiral fields FORMULA , FORMULA . The latter correspond to zero modes of the fermionic
superpartners of the normal fluctuations of the worldsheet FORMULA 
inside the Calabi-Yau, which occur whenever FORMULA  is not an
isolated curve in FORMULA .
There is no action for
FORMULA  or FORMULA . The action for FORMULA  is simply
{{cite:4420ff77-8317-49dc-9ea4-4bf47ee1b64b}}
FORMULA 
FORMULA  is the anti-self-dual part of the
graviphoton field strength, with attractor value FORMULA . Thus the
FORMULA  contribution to the path integral is
FORMULA 
The fermionic zero-modes FORMULA  and their bosonic
superpartners are described by supersymmetric quantum mechanics on
the moduli space FORMULA  of holomorphic deformations of the curve inside
FORMULA . The supersymmetric index we are computing is
independent of the details of this quantum mechanics and is known to
equal the euler characterA typical four-supercharge action
contains a coupling FORMULA , and one can bring down powers of this interaction
to make the path integral over the FORMULA  zero modes not vanish.
One can easily check that this procedure yields the euler character
of moduli space. of FORMULA , which is roughly the
Gromov-Witten invariant FORMULA . Combining it with the factor
that comes from the instanton action, FORMULA , we finally
obtain FORMULA .
It remains to consider the integral over the position zero-mode
FORMULA  and the goldstinos FORMULA . The former is
proportional to the volume of FORMULA  while the latter
vanishes because there is no action. Hence
FORMULA 
This integral
can be defined by use of localization. One adds an exact term
FORMULA  to the action with an arbitrary real
coefficient  FORMULA
FORMULA 
FORMULA  here is a nilpotent combination of the kappa-symmetries
and supersymmetries and FORMULA  is a judiciously chosen operator.
Exactness and nilpotency imply that the integral is independent of
FORMULA . It is most easily evaluated at FORMULA . The
contributions will then be localized to FORMULA -invariant
configurations, which are instantons and anti-instantons sitting at
the center of FORMULA  and the north pole and respectively south pole
of the sphere. The answer we get is some nonzero constant FORMULA , whose
value is most easily determined by comparison to supergravity.
Now let us put everything together. Concentrating for now just on
the contribution of the instanton at the north pole, we have the
following

- a genus-independent constant factor C coming from the integral over the bosonic and goldstino zero-modes

- a factor of FORMULA  coming from the internal worldsheet partition function.

- a factor of FORMULA  from the zero-mode integrals for FORMULA .

Summing these over genera we obtain
FORMULA 
The anti-instanton sitting
at the south pole of the sphere similarly gives a factor of
FORMULA . Exponentiating the sum of the two
contributions we almost have the OSV relation, except we still need
to find the value of FORMULA . This can be fixed by comparing any term in
the expansion of FORMULA  with the corresponding term in the
topological string expansion, as was done in section 3.6, and is FORMULA . In conclusion this indicates that in perturbation
theory
ZBH = ZIIA= |Ztop|2
which is the relation we set out to explain.

FORMULA  and all that
In these lectures several closely related partition functions, all
denoted with the letter FORMULA , have appeared. We will close by
summarizing what we mean by these objects, how they are computed
(or not) and how they are related.
Definitions
FORMULA  This partition function is deduced
from a perturbative spacetime analysis of the thermodynamic
properties of black holes, which at leading order are governed by
the famous Bekenstein-Hawking area-entropy law. Subleading
corrections are computed using Wald's formula. We are not using this
symbol herein to denote an object defined nonperturbatively by
counting BPS states.
In our case, we are interested in extremal black holes, and the
corrections to the area law are computed in a power series in the
inverse graviphoton charge FORMULA , which governs the size of the
black hole. Moreover we are interested in a supersymmetric partition function
with (among other things) a FORMULA  insertion for fermions.
In principle the effect of this on the spacetime analysis and
Wald's formula should be derivable from first principles, but in
practice no one has done so. The arguably well-motivated
assumption has been that the insertions are accounted for by including only
FORMULA  term corrections to Wald's formula.
Any definition of FORMULA  along these lines will necessarily entail some
dependence on the moduli of the Calabi-Yau compactification in which the
black hole sits. This dependence has a beautiful and intricate mathematical
structure following from the “split attractor” phenomena, the unraveling of which has been the subject of recent
progress {{cite:61f048b8-7ec8-44b5-ac03-d360ce0867de}}.
This definition of FORMULA  is essentially perturbative in
FORMULA , and
does not have any obvious non-perturbative completion.
FORMULA  This is defined as the modified
elliptic genus, with appropriate potentials, of the MSW CFT. In
principle this has a chance of being defined nonperturbatively.
However there are a number of complicating issues which have not
been understood (see e.g. {{cite:9364bed5-f59d-4329-be04-718e3015f655}}). An important one is that
one must regulate IR divergences associated with noncompact Coulomb
branches - where the M5-branes can separate. Related issues are the
holomorphic anomaly, background dependence and singularities in the
moduli space of divisors. This is the only potentially
nonperturbatively defined object on our list.
FORMULA  This is the IIA partition function
computed in the string genus expansion around a euclidean attractor
geometry. This expansion is formally equivalent to an expansion in
the RR graviphoton field, so the problems of dealing with background
RR fields are not so severe here. There are the usual issues
associated with euclidean quantum gravity and complex saddle points
that must be dealt with.
FORMULA  This is the topological string
partition function, and is defined in the worldsheet genus
expansion. The expansion coefficients have a precise mathematical
definition in terms of the Gromov-Witten invariants associated to
maps of a genus FORMULA  Riemann surface in to a Calabi-Yau space. So
FORMULA , unlike FORMULA  and FORMULA , is fully defined in
perturbation theory. No nonperturbative definition of the full
function FORMULA  is known.
FORMULA  Another
interesting object, not directly discussed in these lectures but
ultimately very relevant is FORMULA . This is
the (weighted) number of BPS states with charges FORMULA  which
depends (due to jumping phenomena) on the asymptotic value
FORMULA  of the Calabi-Yau moduli, and should be
nonperturbatively well defined. A recent and mathematically precise
definiton of FORMULA , a derivation of some of its properties and a
corresponding precise version of the strong FORMULA  conjecture can be
found in {{cite:61f048b8-7ec8-44b5-ac03-d360ce0867de}}. In our list of objects above, only
FORMULA  is non-perturbatively defined and so potentially related
to FORMULA .

Relations
At a very formal level, FORMULA , in the
appropriate perturbation expansions and with the appropriate
identifications of parameters. Beyond perturbation theory, these
relations are not even formally true. In practice, none of these
equalities have been proven or even stated herein with total
precision. Let us now comment on the various equalities.
 FORMULA
This is a deep statement about the holographic nature of string
theory, and was the early form of FORMULA  duality {{cite:4e1d4259-5505-44b3-9590-4f16f7b9166c}}. At
leading order it has been tested in many examples. Some tests of
subleading terms are discussed in {{cite:487e4463-4cd5-438f-83bd-dfad47877324}}, {{cite:58c216f6-ce39-4b29-9914-bb0451c68c37}}. Beyond
subleading order a better understanding of the definition of the
left hand side is needed.
 FORMULA
This is the weak form of the OSV conjecture. It equates terms in two
differently defined perturbation expansions
{{cite:4b9e91fb-7afa-400c-a53a-d2a97648d0ef}}, {{cite:7360a9f9-667e-4cd3-9a70-d4b4fef871a9}}, {{cite:f9d4da08-2277-4536-9839-f5e293f34281}}, {{cite:a15e3899-c9d5-4e14-9bf2-bb8c03abc7e7}}, {{cite:1feaed99-b5bd-4678-9034-dd5595d8667b}}, {{cite:3f3c9697-fd39-4d28-ae8c-20c2afaf9c9f}}, {{cite:bfe99ee1-3b22-4374-ad70-67951353807e}}, {{cite:0b8b4140-1e00-445a-b494-3853af2b6bfc}}, {{cite:c06e5acf-921a-4087-9058-6b3a8cbc8057}}.
One of the main issues here is understanding how the background
dependence works out. In essence however it is a statement about
string perturbation theory and does not have the dynamical depth of
the preceding equality. It could in principle be precisely stated
and proved without any understanding of non-perturbative string
theory.
 FORMULA
This asserts that the black hole partition function can be
perturbatively repackaged as a euclidean calculation on the
attractor geometry. It is a stringy version of the black hole
methods of semiclassical euclidean quantum gravity, adapted to deal
with an index. Arguments for this equality were given in
{{cite:096c29cb-35df-4168-b1d9-fc0331a86b3a}}. Assuming that this and the preceding equality
is valid for the same definition of FORMULA  leads to
FORMULA , along with a physical explanation of the two
complex conjugate factors on the RHS of the OSV relation.
 FORMULA
This is the strong form of the OSV conjecture, and comes from
combining holographic duality with the perturbative observations of
{{cite:d7d64b34-5987-46a5-a1a3-59c4c840320c}}. Since the right hand side is defined only
perturbatively, it is at most a perturbative statement. Still, it is
extremely interesting in part because both sides are potentially
rigorously defined mathematically. From the mathematical point of
view, it is a totally unexpected relationship between moduli spaces
of divisors and maps of curves into a Calabi-Yau space.
In this paper we have argued from the stringy perspective that a
relation of this form is to be expected. It would be a daunting
task to turn these arguments in to a rigorous mathematical
derivation. While these arguments are informative, in the end
this relation should be regarded as a conjecture to be tested by
direct computation.
In conclusion, the conjectured OSV relationship between the
all-orders expression for the entropy of large BPS black holes and
the all-orders expression for the topological string partition
function potentially allows for precision tests of non-perturbative
string theory. We hope to have provided the reader with a flavor of
this exciting subject that melts together black holes, attractors,
and topological strings, ans at the same time raises interesting new
challenges and puzzles.
FORMULA  Acknowledgements
We are grateful to F. Denef, D. Gaiotto, G. Moore and Xi Yin for
very helpful conversations. Special thanks to C. García for help
with the figures. Finally we wish to thank Laurent Baulieu, Pierre
Vanhove, Paul Windey, Mike Douglas, Jan de Boer and Eliezer
Rabinovici for a really stimulating and fun school. This work has
been partially supported by DOE grant DE-FG02-91ER40654.
