
Numerical solution of shock and ramp compression
for general material properties
Damian C. Swift
damian.swift@physics.org
Materials Science and Technology Division,
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
7000, East Avenue,
Livermore, CA 94550, U.S.A.
A general formulation was developed to represent material models
for applications in dynamic loading.
Numerical methods were devised to calculate response
to shock and ramp compression, and ramp decompression,
generalizing previous solutions for scalar equations of state.
The numerical methods were found to be flexible and robust,
and matched analytic results to a high accuracy.
The basic ramp and shock solution methods were coupled to solve for
composite deformation paths, such as shock-induced impacts, and shock
interactions with a planar interface between different materials.
These calculations capture much of the physics of typical material dynamics
experiments, without requiring spatially-resolving simulations.
Example calculations were made of loading histories in metals,
illustrating the effects of plastic work on the temperatures induced
in quasi-isentropic and shock-release experiments,
and the effect of a phase transition.
March 7, 2007; revised April 8, 2008 and July 1, 2008 – LA-UR-07-2051
material dynamics, shock, isentrope, adiabat, numerical solution,
constitutive behavior
62.50.+p, 47.40.-x, 62.20.-x, 46.35.+z

Introduction
The continuum representation of matter is widely used for material dynamics
in science and engineering.
Spatially-resolved continuum dynamics simulations are the most widespread
and familiar, solving the initial value problem by discretizing the
spatial domain and integrating the dynamical equations forward in time
to predict the motion and deformation of components of the system.
This type of simulation is used, for instance, to study hypervelocity impact
problems such as the vulnerability of armor to projectiles
{{cite:b8a5f32c-7c79-41b6-a6b4-fe9a24f22d16}}, {{cite:023c7d2e-4b2b-4f44-b36f-0cb7fc4f288f}},
the performance of satellite debris shields {{cite:71218ab4-b58e-4186-bc90-7a8318c20f79}},
and the impact of meteorites with planets, notably the formation of
the moon {{cite:b51613e1-2e2c-4b2f-8927-7d640fc4040a}}.
The problem can be divided into the dynamical equations of the continuum,
the state field of the components FORMULA ,
and the inherent properties of the materials.
Given the local material state FORMULA , the material properties allow the
stress FORMULA  to be determined.
Given the stress field FORMULA  and mass density field FORMULA ,
the dynamical equations describe the fields of acceleration, compression, and
thermodynamic work done on the materials.
The equations of continuum dynamics describe the behavior of a dynamically
deforming system of arbitrary complexity.
Particular, simpler deformation paths can be described more compactly by
different sets of equations, and solved by different techniques than those
used for continuum dynamics in general.
Simpler deformation paths occur often in experiments designed to develop and
calibrate models of material properties.
These paths can be regarded as different ways of interrogating the material
properties.
The principal examples in material dynamics are shock and ramp
compression {{cite:1f37a838-3c3b-4576-a478-e7ae00662416}}, {{cite:29e12f77-91e4-4b80-bdf4-754426d2040b}}.
Typical experiments are designed to induce such loading histories and measure
or infer the properties of the material in these states before they are
destroyed by release from the edges or by reflected waves.
The development of the field of material dynamics was driven by applications
in the physics of hypervelocity impact and high explosive systems, including
nuclear weapons {{cite:e990b5a6-d797-41c4-9740-623bdd1062f3}}.
In the regimes of interest, typically components with dimensions ranging from
millimeters to meters and pressures from 1 GPa to 1 TPa,
material behavior is dominated by the scalar equation of state (EOS):
the relationship between pressure, compression (or mass density),
and internal energy.
Other components of stress (specifically shear stresses) are much smaller,
and chemical explosives react promptly so can be treated by simple models
of complete detonation.
EOS were developed as fits to experimental data, particularly to
series of shock states and to isothermal compression measurements
{{cite:23d04480-12cd-4a2d-bdd4-f512dae26f5f}}.
It is relatively straightforward to construct shock and ramp compression
states from an EOS algebraically or numerically depending on the EOS,
and to fit an EOS to these measurements.
More recently, applications and scientific interest have grown
to include a wider range of pressures and time scales,
such as laser-driven inertial confinement fusion {{cite:457a694b-cb7e-402f-a11b-4ff18839a596}},
and experiments are designed to measure other aspects than the EOS, such
as the kinetics of phase changes,
constitutive behavior describing shear stresses, incomplete chemical
reactions, and the effects of microstructure, including grain orientation and
porosity.
Theoretical techniques have also evolved to predict the EOS with FORMULA 1% accuracy {{cite:a8563bfe-dc98-46b8-bfbf-d93e40c45523}}
and elastic contributions to shear stress with slightly poorer
accuracy {{cite:4106fbbb-4306-4d22-8894-368222de8e80}}.
A general convention for representing material states is
described, and numerical methods are reported for calculating shock and
ramp compression states from general representations of material properties.

Conceptual structure for material properties
The desired structure for the description of the material state and properties
under dynamic loading was developed to be as general as possible with respect to
the types of material or models to be represented in the same framework,
and designed to give the greatest amount of commonality between
spatially-resolved simulations and calculations of shock and ramp compressions.
In condensed matter on sub-microsecond time scales, heat conduction
is often too slow to have a significant effect on the response of the material,
and is ignored here.
The equations of non-relativistic continuum dynamics are,
in Lagrangian form, i.e.
along characteristics moving with the local material velocity FORMULA ,
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the mass density and FORMULA  the specific internal energy.
Changes in FORMULA  can be related to changes in the temperature FORMULA  through
the heat capacity.
The inherent properties of each material in the problem are described by its
constitutive relation or equation of state FORMULA .
As well as experiencing compression and work from mechanical deformation,
the local material state FORMULA  can evolve through internal processes
such as plastic flow. In general,
FORMULA 
which can also include the equations for FORMULA 
and FORMULA .
Thus the material properties must describe at a minimum FORMULA 
and FORMULA  for each material.
If they also describe FORMULA , the conductivity,
and FORMULA , then heat conduction can be treated.
Other functions may be needed for particular numerical methods in
continuum dynamics, such as the need for wave speeds
(e.g. the longitudinal
sound speed), which are needed for time step control in explicit time
integration.
Internally, within the material properties models, it is desirable
to re-use software as much as possible, and other functions of the state
are therefore desirable to allow models to be constructed in a modular
and hierarchical way.
Arithmetic manipulations must be performed on the state during numerical
integration,
and these can be encoded neatly using operator overloading,
so the operator of the appropriate type is invoked automatically
without having to include `if-then-else' structures for each
operator as is the case in non-object-oriented programming languages
such as Fortran-77.
For instance, if FORMULA  is calculated in a forward-time numerical method
then changes of state are calculated using numerical evolution equations
such as
FORMULA 
Thus for a general state FORMULA  and its time derivative FORMULA ,
which has an equivalent set of components,
it is necessary to multiply a state by a real number
and to add two states together.
For a specific software implementation, other operations may be needed,
for example to create, copy, or destroy a new instance of a state.
The attraction of this approach is that, by choosing a reasonably general
form for the constitutive relation and associated operations,
it is possible to separate the continuum dynamics part of the problem
from the inherent behavior of the material.
The relations describing the properties of different types of material
can be encapsulated in a library form where the continuum dynamics program
need know nothing about the relations for any specific type of material,
and vice versa.
The continuum dynamics programs and the material properties relations
can be developed and maintained independently of each other, provided that
the interface remains the same (Table REF ).
This is an efficient way to make complicated material models available
for simulations of different types, including Lagrangian and Eulerian hydrocodes
operating on different numbers of dimensions, and calculations of
specific loading or heating histories such as shock and ramp loading
discussed below.
Software interfaces have been developed in the past
for scalar EOS with a single structure for the state {{cite:3e3c4482-117b-4184-9f37-798e6582f7e8}},
but object-oriented techniques make it practical to
extend the concept to much more complicated states, to combinations of models,
and to alternative types of model selected when the program is run,
without having to find a single super-set state encompassing all possible
states as special cases.
A very wide range of types of material behavior can be represented with this
formalism.
At the highest level, different types of behavior are characterized by
different structures for the state FORMULA  (Table REF ).
For each type of state, different specific models can be defined,
such as perfect gas, polytropic and Grüneisen EOS.
For each specific model, different materials are represented by choosing
different values for the parameters in the model,
and different local material states are represented through
different values for the components of FORMULA .
In the jargon of object-oriented programming, the ability to define an object
whose precise type is undetermined until the program is run
is known as polymorphism.
For our application, polymorphism is used at several levels in the hierarchy
of objects, from the overall type of a material
(such as `one represented by a
pressure-density-energy EOS' or `one represented by a deviatoric stress model')
through the type of relation used to describe the properties of that material
type (such as perfect gas, polytropic, or Grüneisen
for a pressure-density-energy EOS,
or Steinberg-Guinan {{cite:6983e1f2-92c1-4d2d-abbd-65d41462d087}} or Preston-Tonks-Wallace {{cite:50b7a059-88b8-44d7-843f-5b00ba3ca1a1}}
for a deviatoric stress model),
to the type of general mathematical function used to represent some
of these relations (such as a polynomial or a tabular representation
of FORMULA  in a polytropic EOS)
(Table REF ).
States or models may be defined by extending or combining other states or models
– this can be implemented using the object-oriented programming concept of
inheritance.
Thus deviatoric stress models can be defined as an extension to any
pressure-density-energy EOS (they are usually written assuming a
specific type, such as Steinberg's cubic Grüneisen form),
homogeneous mixtures can be defined as combinations of any
pressure-density-temperature EOS,
and heterogeneous mixtures can be defined as combinations of materials
each represented by any type of material model.
Trial implementations have been made as libraries
in the C++ and Java programming languages {{cite:7914f873-daf1-4c00-94c1-b0ca3871db80}}.
The external interface to the material properties was general at the level
of representing a generic material type and state.
The type of state and model were then selected when programs using the
material properties library were run.
In C++, objects which were polymorphic at run time had to be represented
as pointers, requiring additional software constructions to allocate
and free up physical memory associated with each object.
It was possible to include general re-usable functions as polymorphic objects
when defining models: real functions of one real parameter could be
polynomials, transcendentals, tabular with different interpolation schemes,
piecewise definitions over different regions of the one dimensional line,
sums, products, etc; again defined specifically at run time.
Object-oriented polymorphism and inheritance were thus very powerful
techniques for increasing software re-use, making the software more
compact and more reliable through the greater use of functions which
had already been tested.
Given conceptual and software structures designed to represent general
material properties suitable for use in spatially-resolved continuum
dynamics simulations, we now consider the use of these generic material
models for calculating idealized loading paths.

Idealized one-dimensional loading
Experiments to investigate the response of materials to dynamic loading,
and to calibrate parameters in models of their behavior,
are usually designed to apply as simple a loading history as is
consistent with the transient state of interest.
The simplest canonical types of loading history are shock and ramp
{{cite:1f37a838-3c3b-4576-a478-e7ae00662416}}, {{cite:29e12f77-91e4-4b80-bdf4-754426d2040b}}.
Methods of solution are presented for calculating the result of
shock and ramp loading for materials described by generalized material
models discussed in the previous section.
Such direct solution removes the need to use a time- and space-resolved
continuum dynamics simulation, allowing states to be calculated with far
greater efficiency and without the need to consider and make allowance for
attributes of resolved simulations such as the finite numerical resolution
and the effect of numerical and artificial viscosities.
Ramp compression
Ramp compression is taken here to mean compression or decompression.
If the material is represented by an inviscid scalar EOS,
i.e.
ignoring dissipative processes and non-scalar effects from elastic strain,
ramp compression follows an isentrope.
This is no longer true when dissipative processes such as
plastic heating occur.
The term `quasi-isentropic' is sometimes used in this context,
particularly for shockless compression;
here we prefer to refer to the thermodynamic trajectories as adiabats
since this is a more appropriate term: no heat is exchanged with
the surroundings on the time scales of interest.
For adiabatic compression, the state evolves according to the
second law of thermodynamics,
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the temperature and FORMULA  the specific entropy.
Thus
FORMULA 
or for a more general material whose stress tensor is more complicated
than a scalar pressure,
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the component of stress normal to the direction of
deformation.
The velocity gradient was expressed through a compression factor
FORMULA  and a strain rate FORMULA .
In all ramp experiments used in the development and calibration
of accurate material models, the strain has been applied uniaxially.
More general strain paths, for instance isotropic or
including a shear component, can be treated by the same formalism,
and that the working rate is then a full inner product
of the stress and strain tensors.
The acceleration or deceleration of the material normal to the wave
as it is compressed or expanded adiabatically is
FORMULA 
from which it can be deduced that
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the longitudinal wave speed.
As with continuum dynamics, internal evolution of the material state
can be calculated simultaneously with the continuum equations,
or operator split and calculated periodically at constant compression
{{cite:787417ed-cbee-4455-aed1-23b84abf8a95}}.
The results are the same to second order in the compression increment.
Operator-splitting allows calculations to be performed without an
explicit entropy, if the continuum equations are integrated isentropically
and dissipative processes are captured by internal evolution at constant
compression.
Operator-splitting is desirable when internal evolution can produce
highly nonlinear changes, such as reaction from solid to gas:
rapid changes in state and properties can make numerical schemes
unstable.
Operator-splitting is also desirable when the integration time step
for internal evolution is much shorter than the continuum dynamics time
step.
Neither of these considerations is very important for ramp compression
without spatial resolution, but operator-splitting was used as an option
in the ramp compression calculations for consistency with continuum
dynamics simulations.
The ramp compression equations were integrated using forward-time
Runge-Kutta numerical schemes of second order.
The fourth order scheme is a trivial extension.
The sequence of operations to calculate an increment of ramp
compression is as follows:

Time increment:
FORMULA 

Predictor:
FORMULA 

Corrector:
FORMULA 

Internal evolution:
FORMULA 

where FORMULA  is the model-dependent state evolution from applied strain,
and FORMULA  is internal evolution at constant compression.
The independent variable for integration is specific volume FORMULA  or
mass density FORMULA ;
for numerical integration finite steps are taken in FORMULA  and FORMULA .
The step size FORMULA  can be controlled so that the
numerical error during integration remains within chosen limits.
A tabular adiabat can be calculated by integrating over a range of
FORMULA  or FORMULA , but when simulating experimental scenarios
the upper limit for integration is usually that one of the other
thermodynamic quantities reaches a certain value, for example that
the normal component of stress reaches zero, which is the case on release from a
high pressure state at a free surface.
Specific end conditions were found by monitoring the quantity of interest
until bracketed by a finite integration step, then bisecting until
the stop condition was satisfied to a chosen accuracy.
During bisection, each trial calculation was performed as an integration
from the first side of the bracket by the trial compression.

Shock compression
Shock compression is the solution of a Riemann problem for the
dynamics of a jump in compression moving with constant speed
and with a constant thickness.
The Rankine-Hugoniot (RH) equations {{cite:1f37a838-3c3b-4576-a478-e7ae00662416}} describing the shock
compression of matter are derived in the continuum approximation,
where the shock is a formal discontinuity in the continuum fields.
In reality, matter is composed of atoms, and shocks have a finite width
governed by the kinetics of dissipative processes – at a fundamental level,
matter does not distinguish between shock compression and ramp compression
with a high strain rate – but the RH equations apply as long
as the width of the region of matter where unresolved processes occur is
constant.
Compared with the isentropic states induced by ramp compression in a
material represented by an EOS, a shock always increases the entropy
and hence the temperature.
With dissipative processes included, the distinction between a ramp and a shock
may become blurred.
The RH equations express the conservation of mass, momentum, and
energy across a moving discontinuity in state.
They are usually expressed in terms of the pressure, but are readily
generalized for materials supporting shear stresses by using the
component of stress normal to the shock (i.e., parallel with the
direction of propagation of the shock), FORMULA :
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the speed of the shock wave with respect to the
material, FORMULA  is the change in material
speed normal to the shock wave (i.e., parallel to its direction
of propagation), and subscript 0 refers to the initial state.
The RH relations can be applied to general material
models if a time scale or strain rate is imposed, and an orientation
chosen for the material with respect to the shock.
Shock compression in continuum dynamics is almost always uniaxial.
The RH equations involve only the initial and final
states in the material.
If a material has properties that depend on the deformation path
– such as plastic flow or viscosity – then physically the detailed shock
structure may make a difference
{{cite:88c3915b-8645-4be1-b7b7-c91a8ecee123}}.
This is a limitation of discontinuous shocks in continuum dynamics:
it may be addressed as discussed above by including dissipative
processes and considering ramp compression, if the dissipative
processes can be represented adequately in the continuum approximation.
Spatially-resolved simulations with numerical differentiation to
obtain spatial derivatives and forward time differencing are
usually not capable of representing shock discontinuities directly,
and an artificial viscosity is used to smear shock compression
over a few spatial cells {{cite:295f8d0f-160d-482b-8308-751ac6d6998f}}.
The trajectory followed by the material in thermodynamic space is a
smooth adiabat with dissipative heating supplied by the artificial viscosity.
If plastic work is also included during this adiabatic compression,
the overall heating for a given compression is greater than from the
RH equations.
To be consistent, plastic flow should be neglected while the
artificial viscosity is non-zero.
This localized disabling of physical processes, particularly time-dependent
ones, during the passage of the unphysically smeared shock was previously
found necessary for numerically stable simulations of detonation waves
by reactive flow {{cite:f6e3102f-1aa1-4fef-88d7-67a2785d406c}}.
Detonation waves are reactive shock waves.
Steady planar detonation (the Chapman-Jouguet state {{cite:5ef4f893-1c88-4772-b780-981911655de8}})
may be calculated using
the RH relations, by imposing the condition that the material
state behind the shock is fully reacted.
Several numerical methods have been used to solve the RH
equations for materials represented by an EOS only
{{cite:720bd99b-1d35-4c10-bcd9-617a3325882e}}, {{cite:429b0320-d9d2-475d-b8e2-534e45397820}}.
The general RH equations may be solved numerically for a given
shock compression FORMULA  by varying the specific internal energy FORMULA 
until the normal stress from the material model equals that from the
RH energy equation, Eq. .
The shock and particle speeds are then calculated from Eqs REF 
and .
This numerical method is particularly convenient for EOS of the form
FORMULA , as FORMULA  may be varied directly.
Solutions may still be found for general material models using
FORMULA , by which the energy may be varied until the solution
is found.
Numerically, the solution was found by bracketing and bisection:

For given compression FORMULA , take the low-energy end
for bracketing as a nearby state FORMULA  (e.g. the previous state,
of lower compression, on the Hugoniot), compressed adiabatically
(to state FORMULA ),
and cooled so the specific internal energy is FORMULA .

Bracket the desired state: apply successively larger heating increments
FORMULA  to FORMULA , evolving each trial state internally,
until FORMULA  from the material model exceeds FORMULA 
from Eq. .

Bisect in FORMULA , evolving each trial state internally,
until FORMULA  equals FORMULA  to the desired accuracy.

As with ramp compression, the independent variable for solution was
mass density FORMULA ,
and finite steps FORMULA  were taken.
Each shock state was calculated independently of the rest,
so numerical errors did not accumulate along the shock Hugoniot.
The accuracy of the solution was independent of FORMULA .
A tabular Hugoniot can be calculated by solving over a range of
FORMULA , but again when simulating experimental scenarios
it is usually more useful to calculate the shock state where one of the other
thermodynamic quantities reaches a certain value, often that FORMULA  and
FORMULA  match the values from another, simultaneous shock calculation
for another material – the situation in impact and shock transmission
problems, discussed below.
Specific stop conditions were found by monitoring the quantity of interest
until bracketed by a finite solution step, then bisecting until
the stop condition was satisfied to a chosen accuracy.
During bisection, each trial calculation was performed as a shock from
the initial conditions to the trial shock compression.

Accuracy: application to air
The accuracy of these numerical schemes was tested by comparing with
shock and ramp compression of a material represented by a perfect gas EOS,
FORMULA 
The numerical solution requires a value to be chosen for every parameter
in the material model, here FORMULA .
Air was chosen as an example material, with FORMULA .
Air at standard temperature and pressure has approximately
FORMULA  g/cmFORMULA  and FORMULA  MJ/kg.
Isentropes for the perfect gas EOS have the form
FORMULA 
and shock Hugoniots have the form
FORMULA 
The numerical solutions reproduced the principal isentrope and Hugoniot
to FORMULA % and 0.1% respectively,
for a compression increment of 1% along the isentrope
and a solution tolerance of FORMULA  GPa for each shock state
(Fig. REF ).
Over most of the range, the error in the Hugoniot was 0.02% or less,
only approaching 0.1% near the maximum shock compression.

Complex behavior of condensed matter
The ability to calculate shock and ramp loci in state space,
i.e.
as a function of varying loading conditions, is particularly convenient
for investigating complex aspects of the response of condensed matter
to dynamic loading.
Each locus can be obtained by a single series of shock or ramp solutions,
rather than having to perform a series of time- and space-resolved
continuum dynamics simulations, varying the initial or boundary conditions
and reducing the solution.
We consider the calculation of temperature in the scalar EOS,
the effect of material strength and the effect of phase changes.
Temperature
The continuum dynamics equations can be closed using a mechanical EOS
relating stress to mass density, strain, and internal energy.
For a scalar EOS, the ideal form to close the continuum equations is
FORMULA , with FORMULA  the natural choice for the primitive state
fields.
However, the temperature is needed as a parameter in physical descriptions
of many contributions to the constitutive response, including
plastic flow, phase transitions, and chemical reactions.
Here, we discuss the calculation of temperature in different forms of the
scalar EOS.
Density-temperature equations of state
If the scalar EOS is constructed from its underlying physical contributions
for continuum dynamics,
it may take the form FORMULA , from which FORMULA  can be
calculated using the second law of thermodynamics {{cite:a8563bfe-dc98-46b8-bfbf-d93e40c45523}}.
An example is the `SESAME' form of EOS, based on interpolated
tabular relations for FORMULA  {{cite:4ba1198b-a597-4c69-a855-e4a51822c9af}}.
A pair of relations FORMULA  can be used as a mechanical EOS
by eliminating FORMULA , which is equivalent to inverting FORMULA  to find
FORMULA , then substituting in FORMULA .
For a general FORMULA  relation, for example for the SESAME EOS,
the inverse can be calculated numerically as required, along an isochore.
In this way, a FORMULA  can be used as a FORMULA  EOS.
Alternatively, the same FORMULA  relation can be used directly
with a primitive state field including temperature instead of energy:
FORMULA .
The evolution of the state under mechanical work then involves the
calculation of FORMULA , i.e. the reciprocal of the
specific heat capacity, which is a derivative of FORMULA .
As this calculation does not require FORMULA  to be inverted,
it is computationally more efficient to use FORMULA  EOS
with a temperature-based, rather than energy-based, state.
The main disadvantage is that it is more difficult to ensure exact
energy conservation as the continuum dynamics equations are integrated in time,
but any departure from exact conservation is at the level of accuracy of
the algorithm used to integrate the heat capacity.
Both structures of EOS have been implemented for material property calculations.
Taking a SESAME type EOS, thermodynamic loci were calculated
with FORMULA  or FORMULA  primitive states, for comparison
(Fig. REF ).
For a monotonic EOS, the results were indistinguishable within differences from
forward or reverse interpolation of the tabular relations.
When the EOS, or the effective surface using a given order of interpolating
function, was non-monotonic, the results varied greatly because of
non-uniqueness when eliminating FORMULA  for the FORMULA  primitive state.

Temperature model for mechanical equations of state
Mechanical EOS are often available as empirical, algebraic relations
FORMULA , derived from shock data.
Temperature can be calculated without altering the mechanical EOS by adding
a relation FORMULA .
While this relation could take any form in principle, one can also follow
the logic of the Grüneisen EOS, in which the pressure is defined
in terms of its deviation FORMULA  from
a reference curve FORMULA .
Thus temperatures can be calculated by reference to a compression curve along
which the temperature and specific internal energy are known,
FORMULA ,
and a specific heat capacity defined as a function of density FORMULA .
In the calculations, this augmented EOS was represented
as a `mechanical-thermal' form comprising any FORMULA  EOS plus the
reference curves – an example of software inheritance and polymorphism.
One natural reference curve for temperature is the cold curve, FORMULA  K.
The cold curve can be estimated from the principal isentrope
FORMULA 
using the estimated density variation of the Grüneisen parameter:
FORMULA 
{{cite:37e81d0d-be78-4d61-850d-a0f00509bb2f}}.
In this work, the principal isentrope was calculated in tabular form
from the mechanical EOS, using the ramp compression algorithm described above.
Empirical EOS are calibrated using experimental data.
Shock and adiabatic compression measurements on strong materials
inevitably include elastic-plastic contributions as well as the
scalar EOS itself.
If the elastic-plastic contributions are not taken into account
self-consistently, the EOS may implicitly include contributions from
the strength.
A unique scalar EOS can be constructed to reproduce the normal stress
as a function of compression for any unique loading path:
shock or adiabat, for a constant or smoothly-varying strain rate.
Such an EOS would not generally predict the response to other
loading histories.
The EOS and constitutive properties for the materials
considered here were constructed self-consistently from shock data
– this does not mean the models are accurate for other loading paths,
as neither the EOS nor the strength model includes all the physical terms
that real materials exhibit.
This does not in any case matter for the purposes of demonstrating the
properties of the numerical schemes.
This mechanical-thermal procedure was applied to Al using
a Grüneisen EOS fitted to the same shock data used to calculate the
FORMULA  EOS discussed above {{cite:37e81d0d-be78-4d61-850d-a0f00509bb2f}}.
Temperatures were in good agreement (Fig. REF ).
The mechanical-thermal calculations required a similar computational effort to
the tabular FORMULA  EOS with a FORMULA  primitive states
(and were thus much more efficient than the tabular EOS with FORMULA 
states), and described the EOS far more compactly.

Strength
For dynamic compressions to FORMULA  and above,
on microsecond time scales,
the flow stress of solids is often treated as a correction or
small perturbation to the scalar EOS.
However, the flow stress has been observed to be much higher on nanosecond
time scales {{cite:a347e17b-780c-4c1e-b2ed-6d759644e01e}},
and interactions between elastic and plastic waves may have a significant
effect on the compression and wave propagation.
The Rankine-Hugoniot equations should be solved self-consistently with
strength included.
Preferred representation of isotropic strength
There is an inconsistency in the standard continuum dynamics treatment
of scalar (pressure) and tensor (stress) response.
The scalar EOS expresses the pressure FORMULA  as the
dependent quantity, which is the most convenient form for use in the
continuum equations.
Standard practice is to use sub-Hookean elasticity (hypoelastic form)
{{cite:787417ed-cbee-4455-aed1-23b84abf8a95}} (Table REF ), in which the state parameters
include the stress deviator FORMULA , evolved by integration
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the shear modulus and FORMULA  the strain rate deviator.
Thus the isotropic and deviatoric contributions to stress are not
treated in an equivalent way: the pressure is calculated from a local state
involving a strain-like parameter (mass density), whereas the stress
deviator evolves with the time-derivative of strain.
This inconsistency causes problems along complicated loading paths
because FORMULA  varies strongly with compression:
if a material is subjected to a shear strain FORMULA ,
then isotropic compression (increasing the shear modulus from FORMULA  to FORMULA ,
leaving FORMULA  unchanged),
then shear unloading to isotropic stress, the true unloading strain
is FORMULA , whereas the hypoelastic calculation would require
a strain of FORMULA .
Using Be and the Steinberg-Guinan strength model as an example of the
difference between hypoelastic and hyperelastic calculations, consider
an initial strain to a flow stress of 0.3 GPa followed by
isothermal, isotropic compression to 100 GPa,.
the strain to unload to a state of
isotropic stress is 0.20% (hyperelastic) and 0.09% (hypoelastic).
The discrepancy arises because the hypoelastic model does not increase
the deviatoric stress under compression at constant deviatoric strain.
The stress can be considered as a direct response of the
material to the instantaneous state of elastic strain: FORMULA .
This relation can be predicted directly with electronic structure calculations
of the stress tensor in a solid for a given compression and elastic strain
state {{cite:4106fbbb-4306-4d22-8894-368222de8e80}},
and is a direct generalization of the scalar equation of state.
A more consistent representation of the state parameters is to use
the strain deviator FORMULA  rather than FORMULA , and to calculate
FORMULA  from scratch when required using
FORMULA 
– a hyperelastic formulation.
The state parameters are then FORMULA .
The different formulations give different answers when deviatoric strain
is accumulated at different compressions, in which case
the hyperelastic formulation is correct.
If the shear modulus varies with strain deviator – i.e., for nonlinear
elasticity – then the definition of FORMULA  must be adjusted
to give the same stress for a given strain.
Many isotropic strength models use scalar measures of the strain and stress
to parameterize work hardening and to apply a yield model of flow stress:
FORMULA 
Inconsistent conventions for equivalent scalar measures have been used by
different workers.
In the present work, the common shock physics convention was used that
the flow stress component of FORMULA  is FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the flow stress.
For consistency with published speeds and amplitudes for elastic waves,
FORMULA , in contrast to other values previously
used for lower-rate deformation {{cite:75d5b3da-bd12-48bb-8786-d2d09f85a359}}.
In principle, the values of FORMULA  and FORMULA  do not matter
as long as the strength parameters were calibrated using the same values
then used in any simulations.

Beryllium
The flow stress measured from laser-driven shock experiments on
Be crystals a few tens of micrometers thick is, at around 5-9 GPa
{{cite:a347e17b-780c-4c1e-b2ed-6d759644e01e}},
much greater than the 0.3-1.3 GPa measured on microsecond time scales.
A time-dependent crystal plasticity model for Be is being developed,
and the behavior under dynamic loading depends on the detailed time dependence
of plasticity.
Calculations were performed with the Steinberg-Guinan strength model
developed for microsecond scale data {{cite:37e81d0d-be78-4d61-850d-a0f00509bb2f}},
and, for the purposes of rough comparison, with
elastic-perfectly plastic response with a flow stress of 10 GPa.
The elastic-perfectly plastic model neglected pressure- and work- hardening.
Calculations were made of the principal adiabat and shock Hugoniot,
and of a release adiabat from a state on the principal Hugoniot.
Calculations were made with and without strength.
Considering the state trajectories in stress-volume space,
it is interesting to note that heating from plastic flow may push
the adiabat above the Hugoniot, because of the greater heating obtained by
integrating along the adiabat compared with jumping from the initial to the
final state on the Hugoniot (Fig. REF ).
Even with an elastic-perfectly plastic strength model, the with-strength
curves do not lie exactly FORMULA  above the strengthless curves,
because heating from plastic flow contributes an increasing amount of
internal energy to the EOS as compression increases.
An important characteristic for the seeding of instabilities by
microstructural variations in shock response is the shock stress at which
an elastic wave does not run ahead of the shock.
In Be with the high flow stress of nanosecond response,
the relation between shock and particle speeds is significantly different
from the relation for low flow stress (Fig. REF ).
For low flow stress, the elastic wave travels at 13.2 km/s.
A plastic shock travels faster than this for pressures greater than 110 GPa,
independent of the constitutive model.
The speed of a plastic shock following the initial elastic wave is similar to
the low strength case, because the material is already at its flow stress,
but the speed of a single plastic shock is appreciably higher.
For compression to a given normal stress, the temperature is significantly
higher with plastic flow included.
The additional heating is particularly striking on the principal adiabat:
the temperature departs significantly from the principal isentrope.
Thus ramp-wave compression of strong materials may lead to significant
levels of heating, contrary to common assumptions of small temperature
increases {{cite:167485ec-39e3-48d8-8ced-31a0286afa01}}.
Plastic flow is largely irreversible, so heating occurs on unloading
as well as loading.
Thus, on adiabatic release from a shock-compressed state, additional
heating occurs compared with the no-strength case.
These levels of heating are important as shock or release melting may
occur at a significantly lower shock pressure than would be expected
ignoring the effect of strength.
(Fig. REF .)

Phase changes
An important property of condensed matter is phase changes,
including solid-solid polymorphism and solid-liquid.
An equilibrium phase diagram can be represented as a single overall EOS
surface as before.
Multiple, competing phases with kinetics for each phase transformation
can be represented conveniently using
the structure described above for general material properties,
for example by describing the local state as a set of volume fractions
FORMULA  of each possible simple-EOS phase, with transition rates and
equilibration among them.
This model is described in more detail elsewhere {{cite:f6e3102f-1aa1-4fef-88d7-67a2785d406c}}.
However, it is interesting to investigate the robustness of the
numerical scheme for calculating shock Hugoniots when the EOS has
the discontinuities in value and gradient associated with phase changes.
The EOS of molten metal, and the solid-liquid phase transition, can be
represented to a reasonable approximation as an adjustment to the EOS of the
solid:
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA 
and FORMULA  is the specific latent heat of fusion.
Taking the EOS and a modified Lindemann melting curve for Al
{{cite:37e81d0d-be78-4d61-850d-a0f00509bb2f}}, and using FORMULA  MJ/kg,
the shock Hugoniot algorithm was found to operate stably across the phase
transition (Fig. REF ).

Composite loading paths
Given methods to calculate shock and adiabatic loading paths from arbitrary
initial states,
a considerable variety of experimental scenarios can be treated
from the interaction of loading or unloading waves with interfaces
between different materials,
in planar geometry for uniaxial compression.
The key physical constraint is that, if two dissimilar materials are to
remain in contact after an interaction such as an impact or the passage of
a shock, the normal stress FORMULA  and particle speed FORMULA  in
both materials must be equal on either side of the interface.
The change in particle speed and stress normal to the waves were
calculated above for compression waves running in the direction of
increasing spatial ordinate (left to right).
Across an interface, the sense is reversed for the material at the left.
Thus a projectile impacting a stationary target to the right is
decelerated from its initial speed by the shock induced by impact.
The general problem at an interface can be analyzed by considering the
states at the instant of first contact – on impact, or when a shock
traveling through a sandwich of materials first reaches the interface.
The initial states are FORMULA .
The final states are FORMULA  where FORMULA  is the
joint particle speed, FORMULA ,
and FORMULA  is connected to FORMULA  by either a shock or an adiabat,
starting at the appropriate initial velocity and stress,
and with orientation given by the side of the system each material
occurs on.
Each type of wave is considered in turn, looking for an intersection
in the FORMULA  plane.
Examples of these wave interactions are
the impact of a projectile with a stationary target (Fig. REF ),
release of a shock state at a free surface or a material
(e.g. a window) of lower
shock impedance (hence reflecting a release wave into the shocked
material – Fig. REF ),
reshocking at a surface with a material of higher shock impedance
(Fig. REF ),
or tension induced as materials try to separate in opposite directions
when joined by a bonded interface (Fig. REF ).
Each of these scenarios may occur in turn following the impact of
a projectile with a target: if the target is layered then a shock is
transmitted across each interface with a release or a reshock reflected back,
depending on the materials;
release ultimately occurs at the rear of the projectile and the far end of
the target, and the oppositely-moving release waves subject the projectile
and target to tensile stresses when they interact
(Fig. REF ).
As an illustration of combining shock and ramp loading calculations,
consider the problem of an Al projectile, initially traveling at 3.6 km/s,
impacting a stationary, composite target
comprising a Mo sample and a LiF release window
{{cite:98173db2-6ffc-48f4-a83d-ab46bdaecf82}}, {{cite:d8349aeb-ebc8-45bd-ad3a-53d9506c1da9}}.
The shock and release states were calculated
using published material properties {{cite:37e81d0d-be78-4d61-850d-a0f00509bb2f}}.
The initial shock state was calculated to have a normal stress of
63.9 GPa.
On reaching the LiF, the shock was calculated to transmit at 27.1 GPa,
reflecting as a release in the Mo.
These stresses match the continuum dynamics simulation to within 0.1 GPa
in the Mo and 0.3 GPa in the LiF, using the same material properties
(Fig. REF ).
The associated wave and particle speeds match to a similar accuracy;
wave speeds are much more difficult to extract from the continuum dynamics
simulation.
An extension of this analysis can be used to calculate the
interaction of oblique shocks with an interface {{cite:89208521-780f-4f05-a4ac-633941362d07}}.

Conclusions
A general formulation was developed to represent material models
for applications in dynamic loading, suitable for software implementation
in object-oriented programming languages.
Numerical methods were devised to calculate the response of matter
represented by the general material models to shock and ramp compression,
and ramp decompression,
by direct evaluation of the thermodynamic pathways for these compressions
rather than spatially-resolved simulations.
This approach is a generalization of earlier work on solutions for materials
represented by a scalar equation of state.
The numerical methods were found to be flexible and robust: capable of
application to materials with very different properties.
The numerical solutions matched analytic results to a high accuracy.
Care was needed with the interpretation of some types of physical response,
such as plastic flow, when applied to deformation at high strain rates.
The underlying time-dependence of processes occurring during deformation
should be taken into account.
The actual history of loading and heating experienced by material
during the passage of a shock may influence the final state – this history
is not captured in the continuum approximation to material dynamics,
where shocks are treated as discontinuities.
Thus care is also needed in spatially resolved simulations when shocks
are modeled using artificial viscosity to smear them unphysically over
a finite thickness.
Calculations were shown to demonstrate the operation of the algorithms
for shock and ramp compression with material models representative of
complex solids including strength and phase transformations.
The basic ramp and shock solution methods were coupled to solve for
composite deformation paths, such as shock-induced impacts, and shock
interactions with a planar interface between different materials.
Such calculations capture much of the physics of typical material dynamics
experiments, without requiring spatially-resolving simulations.
The results of direct solution of the relevant shock and ramp loading
conditions were compared with hydrocode simulations, showing complete
consistency.

Acknowledgments
Ian Gray introduced the author to the concept of
multi-model material properties software.
Lee Markland developed a prototype Hugoniot-calculating computer
program for equations of state while working for the author as an undergraduate
summer student.
Evolutionary work on material properties libraries was supported
by the U.K. Atomic Weapons Establishment, Fluid Gravity Engineering Ltd,
and Wessex Scientific and Technical Services Ltd.
Refinements to the technique and applications to the problems described
were undertaken at Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) and
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL).
The work was performed partially in support of, and funded by,
the National Nuclear Security Agency's
Inertial Confinement Fusion program at LANL (managed by Steven Batha), and
LLNL's Laboratory-Directed Research and Development project 06-SI-004
(Principal Investigator: Hector Lorenzana).
The work was performed under the auspices of
the U.S. Department of Energy under contracts W-7405-ENG-36,
DE-AC52-06NA25396, and DE-AC52-07NA27344.

References
TABLE 
TABLE 
TABLE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 

List of figures

Principal isentrope and shock Hugoniot for air (perfect gas):
numerical calculations for general material models,
compared with analytic solutions.

Shock Hugoniot for Al in pressure-temperature space,
for different representations of the equation of state.

Principal adiabat and shock Hugoniot
for Be in normal stress-compression space,
neglecting strength (dashed), for Steinberg-Guinan strength (solid),
and for elastic-perfectly plastic with FORMULA  GPa (dotted).

Principal adiabat and shock Hugoniot
for Be in shock speed-normal stress space,
neglecting strength (dashed), for Steinberg-Guinan strength (solid),
and for elastic-perfectly plastic with FORMULA  GPa (dotted).

Principal adiabat, shock Hugoniot, and release adiabat
for Be in normal stress-temperature space,
neglecting strength (dashed), for Steinberg-Guinan strength (solid),
and for elastic-perfectly plastic with FORMULA  GPa (dotted).

Demonstration of shock Hugoniot solution across a phase boundary:
shock-melting of Al, for different initial porosities.

Wave interactions for the impact of a flat projectile
moving from left to right with a stationary target.
Dashed arrows are a guide to the sequence of states.
For a projectile moving from right to left, the construction is the
mirror image reflected in the normal stress axis.

Wave interactions for the release of a shocked state
(shock moving from left to right)
into a stationary `window' material to its right.
The release state depends whether the window has a higher or lower
shock impedance than the shocked material.
Dashed arrows are a guide to the sequence of states.
For a shock moving from right to left, the construction is the
mirror image reflected in the normal stress axis.

Wave interactions for the release of a shocked state
by tension induced as materials try to separate in opposite directions
when joined by a bonded interface.
Material damage, spall, and separation are neglected: the construction
shows the maximum tensile stress possible.
For general material properties, e.g. if plastic flow is included,
the state of maximum tensile stress is not just the negative of the
initial shock state.
Dashed arrows are a guide to the sequence of states.
The graph shows the initial state after an impact by a projectile moving
from right to left;
for a shock moving from right to left, the construction is the
mirror image reflected in the normal stress axis.

Schematic of uniaxial wave interactions induced by the impact
of a flat projectile with a composite target.

Hydrocode simulation of Al projectile at 3.6 km/s
impacting a Mo target with a LiF release window,
1.1 FORMULA s after impact.
Structures on the waves are elastic precursors.

