
[Spectral analysis of Swift GRBs with known FORMULA ]
Spectral analysis of Swift long GRBs with known redshift
[Cabrera et al.]
J. I. Cabrera FORMULAE–mail: jcabrera@astroscu.unam.mx,
C. FirmaniFORMULA , V. Avila–ReeseFORMULA , G. GhirlandaFORMULA , G. GhiselliniFORMULA  and
L. Nava FORMULA
FORMULA Instituto de Astronomía, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,
A.P. 70–264, 04510, México, D.F.
FORMULA Osservatorio Astronomico di Brera, via E.Bianchi 46, I–23807 Merate, Italy
FORMULA Universitá degli studi dell'Insubria,
Dipartimento di Fisica e Matematica, via Valleggio 11, I–22100 Como, Italy
We study the spectral and energetics properties of 47
long–duration gamma–ray bursts (GRBs) with known redshift, all of them
detected by the Swift satellite. Due to the narrow energy range (15–150 keV)
of the Swift–BAT detector, the spectral fitting is reliable
only for fitting models with 2 or 3 parameters. As high uncertainty and correlation
among the errors is expected, a careful analysis of the errors is necessary.
We fit both the power law (PL, 2 parameters) and cut–off power law (CPL, 3
parameters) models to the time–integrated spectra of the 47 bursts,
and we present the corresponding parameters, their uncertainties, and
the correlations among the uncertainties.
The CPL model is reliable only for 29 bursts for which we estimate the FORMULA   peak energy  FORMULA. For these GRBs, we calculate the energy fluence
and the rest–frame isotropic–equivalent radiated energy,  FORMULA, as well as the
propagated uncertainties and correlations among them. We explore the distribution
of our homogeneous sample of GRBs on the rest–frame diagram  FORMULA vs
 FORMULA. We confirm a significant correlation between these two quantities
(the “Amati" relation) and we verify that, within the uncertainty limits, no
outliers are present. We also fit the spectra to a Band model with the
high energy power law index frozen to FORMULA , obtaining a rather good agreement
with the “Amati" relation of non–Swift GRBs.
gamma rays: bursts — gamma rays: sources
Introduction
The Swift Mission {{cite:a1534fbd-f119-4e08-b8c9-851a181b0c63}} was designed mainly to
rapidly detect, locate, and observe gamma–ray bursts (GRBs).
After more than two years of operation, the Swift satellite
has observed approximately 180 GRBs, for which more than 50
events have known redshifts reported in the Mission
homepagehttp://swift.gsfc.nasa.gov/.
In this paper we present results
from an homogeneous spectral analysis that we have carried out
to the Swift long–duration GRBs with known FORMULA  with the main aim of estimating
the time–averaged spectral parameters of the prompt emission of these bursts,
as well as related global quantities like the prompt energy fluence,  FORMULA, and
the rest–frame isotropic–equivalent radiated energy,  FORMULA.
Unfortunately, the spectral coverage of the Swift FORMULA –ray detector,
the Burst Alert Telescope {{cite:1026a315-1be0-4b45-83d2-c3c44c8636ae}}, is very narrow.
The recommendation is to limit the spectral
analysis to channels between 15 keV and 195 keV, though the Swift–BAT's
team suggests a more conservative upper limit of 150 keV because,
above this energy, the calibration is not yet sufficiently reliable.
Thus, the BAT energy range is not broad enough to allow the spectra to be fitted
unambiguously by the usual GRB broken power–law function of 4 parameters.
Therefore, the inference of FORMULA –ray spectral parameters and global
quantities related to these parameters for the Swift GRBs is not an
easy task.
A main concern of this task is the determination of the uncertainties of the
spectral parameters and their propagation into the composite quantities.
Due to the narrow energy range of Swift BAT we know a priori that the errors
in the fitted spectral parameters will be large and correlated among them.
Therefore, the
appropriate handling of errors is crucial in order to make useful the spectral
data generated by BAT. The effort is justified by the great value that
an homogeneous sample has, where the spectral information for all the events
is obtained with the same detector and analyzed with the same techniques and
methods. This is the case of the growing–in–number sample of Swift GRBs.
The characterization of the time–averaged photon spectra of GRBs with known
redshift is important for several reasons. On one hand, this characterization
offers clues for understanding the radiation and particle acceleration mechanisms
at work during the prompt phase of the bursts
{{cite:eb15c8ee-dd76-4fff-ba2b-593709bf2812}}, {{cite:52d717c2-ff66-4781-914b-7a6c0d483653}}, {{cite:407d890d-8e47-431c-af5f-0b8ba1f7c541}}, {{cite:392b62b6-00c0-4eff-b0c2-316b8d907d65}}.
On the other hand, the spectral parameters and the global quantities inferred
from them ( FORMULA,  FORMULA, etc.) are among the main properties that
characterize GRBs. The study of the rest–frame correlations among these and
other properties {{cite:3d0c529c-b4f2-44de-8ca7-f3de2340e9df}}, {{cite:cad7a37f-8b9d-47e6-a605-f373ef8ab44e}}, {{cite:89329d8e-5962-46ee-a7eb-92a37c24807b}}, {{cite:f8ce47de-396f-4946-aff1-29eaba18abe3}}, {{cite:1cd13889-dfba-4099-9977-7ead74fe66e3}}, {{cite:af6966a6-7f93-49ae-b988-e84f5e3710d0}} is currently allowing to learn key aspects of the nature of GRBs
{{cite:dd592030-127b-4dbc-af15-c78b93411c6b}}, {{cite:d5fe0b62-c709-437a-a300-0919c6ea87e1}}, {{cite:126b0547-a69f-421e-b61c-4bcea297134e}}. Furthermore, those correlations that are
tight enough can be used to standardize the energetics of GRBs, making possible
to apply GRBs for constructing the Hubble diagram up to unprecedentedly high redshifts
{{cite:1cd13889-dfba-4099-9977-7ead74fe66e3}}, {{cite:be0b7f66-230b-461a-a952-24730011bfa0}}, {{cite:0a1c1d12-acf0-4d49-b6a2-ff6446f1cc29}}. These tight correlations, for
a given
cosmological model, can be used also to estimate the (pseudo)redshifts of GRBs
with not measured redshifts, mainly from the extensive CGRO–BATSE databaseIn a recent paper, {{cite:0bfe2af1-f650-4fa8-8774-72befd7bc377}} showed that due both to a redshift degeneracy in the so–called Amati
correlation {{cite:3d0c529c-b4f2-44de-8ca7-f3de2340e9df}} and to its high scatter, is not possible to infer reliable (pseudo)redshifts
from this correlation.
{{cite:b4fad748-1aea-4799-9e3b-625b8bb0b744}}, {{cite:cad7a37f-8b9d-47e6-a605-f373ef8ab44e}}. Thus, by combining the distribution in redshift of a
large sample of GRBs with the observed flux distribution, inferences on the
luminosity function and formation rate of GRBs can be obtained
{{cite:9797d6ed-e110-488a-b32b-af0524f9167c}}, {{cite:d5610469-79af-4623-a5b4-48115ec983ff}}.
The outline of this paper is as follows. In §2 we explain the main
steps of the spectral analysis carried out by us: selection of the sample
(§§2.1), spectral deconvolution (fit) procedure and fitting models (§§2.2),
and error analysis (§§2.3). The results of the
spectral analysis are given in §3, along with the estimates
of  FORMULA  and  FORMULA  as well as some correlations among the obtained
quantities. The summary and conclusions of the paper are presented in §4.
In the Appendix the deconvolved spectra of the 47 GRBs studied here are plotted.
We adopt the concordance FORMULA CDM cosmology with FORMULA ,
FORMULA , and FORMULA  km sFORMULA MpcFORMULA .

Spectral analysis
The first step in our spectral analysis is the selection of the
Swift  sub-sample of GRBs to be studied (§§2.1). Then we proceed
to the spectral deconvolution with XSPEC and determination of
the GRB spectral parameters for two– and three–parameter photon models
(§§2.2). By using these parameters, the energy fluence and isotropic–equivalent
energy are calculated. Finally, we construct the error confidence ellipses for
the spectral parameters and  FORMULA  (§§2.3).
The BAT is a large aperture FORMULA ray telescope. It consists of a
(2.4FORMULA 1.2)m coded aperture mask supported one meter above the 5200 cmFORMULA 
area
detector plane. The detector contains 32,768 individual cadmium-zinc-telluride
detector elements, each one of (4FORMULA 4FORMULA 2)mm size. The effective efficiency
of BAT starts at approximately 15 keV, attains a broad maximum at approximately
30–100 keV and then falls off, attaining at 195 keV the same level as at 15 keV.
Due to the 1 mm thickness of the lead tiles, the BAT coded mask starts to be
transparent around 150 keV. We reduce the BAT's data using the analysis techniques
provided by the BAT's instrument
teamhttp://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/swift/analysis/threads.
The sample
We analyse the time–integrated spectra of all available Swift  GRBs with known
redshift FORMULA . The list of events was taken from the daily updated compilation
of J. Greinerhttp://www.mpe.mpg.de/ jcg/grbgen.html for the period January
2005 to January 2007. The corresponding file spectra were loaded from the
legacy NASA databaseftp://legacy.gsfc.nasa.gov/swift/data/obs. The total
number of events in this list was 55. We exclude from the list the short–duration
bursts (FORMULA s; GRB050509, GRB050724, and GRB061217) as well as those events
with incomplete observational information (GRB050730, GRB060124, GRB060218,
GRB060505 and GRB060512), leaving us with a preliminary list of 47 long GRBs with
measured FORMULA .
The list of 47 events is given in Table REF . The first four columns of
Table REF  give respectively the burst name, the class (see below), the
redshift FORMULA , and the time T FORMULAthat we use to integrate the spectrum.
In principle TFORMULA  could be used as an integration time. Nevertheless
two problems arise in this case. The first one has to do with the systematic
underestimate of the fluence, hence of  FORMULA. The second problem may be more
important; the elimination of the (early and late) wings in the light curve
can influence the estimates of the spectral parameters. For example the elimination
of the late wing may harden artificially the spectrum.
For these reasons we have fixed the integration time by a visual
inspection of the light curve as the period where the signal is
clearly identifiable in the background noise.
A modest overestimate of T FORMULA  does not influence on the values of the
integrated parameters, though increases the noise.
We would like to remark that T FORMULA  is not a good estimate of the burst duration
because its uncertainty is related to the identification of faint
(some time extended) wings.
TABLE 

Spectral fits
It is well known that the GRB photon spectra
are in general well described, in the energy range of
FORMULA  keV to a few MeV, by the so–called Band function {{cite:66c68875-81a2-426e-8112-81eea2c2377a}},
which is a two smoothly connected power laws:
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  and FORMULA  are the photon indices of the low and high
energy power laws, respectively, and  FORMULA  is the FORMULA folding (break)
energy related to the peak energy in the FORMULA  [or FORMULA ] spectrum by
FORMULA . Note that  FORMULA  is well defined for
FORMULA  and FORMULA . The normalization FORMULA 
is in photons sFORMULA  cmFORMULA  keVFORMULA .
The spectral range of BAT is narrower than that one of BATSE
and other previous detectors. In the most recent update of the BAT–team
homepagehttp://swift.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/swift/analysis/bat-digest.html
it is written that due to varying threshold levels in individual detectors,
channels below 15 keV should not be used for spectral analysis. Likewise,
channels above 150 keV are unreliable due to a lack of calibration data at
those energies. Then, we are limited to the narrow energy band of 15–150
keV for the spectral analysis of Swift  bursts. This implies that model
fitting with the 4–parameter Band function will not be reliable for
most of these burst. Therefore, we proceed to fit the observed photon
spectra to both the power law (PL) and cutoff power law (CPL) models.
The former has only two parameters, the normalization,  FORMULA,
and the photon index,  FORMULA, and is given by:
FORMULA 
The CPL model implies one more parameter, an energy FORMULA folding spectral
break,  FORMULA, related to  FORMULA  in the same way as in the Band model (see above).
The CPL model is defined as:
FORMULA 
It is easy to verify that the CPL model (named also the Compton –COMP–
model) is the Band model with FORMULA .
As we will see later, the complex nature of the errors due to the small energy
range of the spectra makes it more convenient to use the logarithms of  FORMULA  and
 FORMULA  (or  FORMULA) rather than the linear quantities. This choice reduces the asymmetry
of the errors and of the confidence levels (CL) contour shapes. Therefore, we
have introduced into XSPEC new models corresponding to Eqs. (REF ) and
(REF ) (and also Eq. (1); see §§3.3) to carry out the fits with Log FORMULA  and Log FORMULA.
The spectral analysis was carried out by using the heasoft6.1.2 public
softwarehttp://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/software/lheasoft/download.html.
The first step in our analysis is to define the background–subtracted
light curve from the corresponding data file.
The photon counts at each channel are taken in the time interval T FORMULA where
the main light curve is clearly above the background noise. The spectral file
was corrected by position and systematic errors. Then, the photon counts at each
channel is convolved with a response matrix, build up for a given event with the
calibration matrixWe use the January 2007 matrix calibration
provided by the Swift–BAT team., in order to obtain the time–integrated energy
spectrum. As mentioned above, the BAT detector is well calibrated only in the
15–150 keV energy range. Therefore, we used the 60 BAT channels in this range,
with the default binning.
The spectral fit to the different photon models mentioned above was performed with
the heasoft package XPSEC (version 11.3.1).
TABLE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
For the GRBs for which the (CPL)  FORMULA  may be estimated,
we calculate the fluence,  FORMULA, corresponding to the observed
spectral band (15–150 keV) only with the aim of completeness.
In addition the rest isotropic–equivalent energy,  FORMULA, is
calculated from the observer bolometric fluence FORMULA 
corresponding to the spectral range 1–10000 keV at rest:
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the cosmology–dependent luminosity distance.

Errors from the fit and error propagation
A main concern of the spectral deconvolution of BAT spectra is the expected
large uncertainty and correlations among the fitted spectral parameters.
Consequently, a careful interpretation of the errors is crucial to make
usable and reliable the spectral analysis of Swift GRBs.
First, as mentioned above, we have carried out the fits using Log FORMULA (PL model), and Log FORMULA and Log FORMULA (CPL model), instead of the corresponding
linear values. The errors in the linear parameters
are very asymmetric and correlated among them in a very complex way;
the corresponding regions at a given CL, as plotted with
the XSPEC command FORMULA  in the plane of two parameters, have shapes
strongly deviating from ellipses.
Instead, the errors and the CL regions when the fits are carried out
with logarithmic quantities, tend to be more symmetric and
ellipse–shaped, respectively.
This facilitates the handling of the errors to calculate composite quantities and
correlations among the GRB parameters.
The FORMULA  command of XSPEC, generates ellipsoidal confidence intervals
that approximate the complex regions of joint variation of the parameters.
These ellipsoids are characterized by the semi–axis lengths, FORMULA 
(they are the square root of the variances), where FORMULA  is for each axis,
and the corresponding principal axes (unitary vectors  FORMULA).
We use these data to calculate the covariance matrix, FORMULA , and the
elliptical boundary of the desired CL region in the subspace of interest
{{cite:58ef41de-63ae-4688-8900-34fefcf90f5d}}. The diagonal elements of the matrix, FORMULA ,
are the variances of each model
parameter (two for the PL model and three for the CPL model), while the
off–diagonal elements (covariances) show the correlations among the parameters.
The error propagation from the spectral quantities (Log FORMULA,  FORMULA, Log FORMULA)
to the composite quantities Log FORMULA (being FORMULA  the peak energy
at rest FORMULA  [1+z)]) and Log FORMULA  is performed in two
steps.
First, we have extracted sets of spectral quantities by a Monte Carlo
method according to their elliptical CL. Then, for each set we have
calculated the corresponding composite quantities as well as their
covariance matrix averaging on the overall extractions.
From this last covariance matrix the elliptical CL of the
composite quantities is obtained.
TABLE 

Results
In Table REF  we present the results from the spectral fit to the PL model
for the whole sample of 47 long GRBs. Columns 1 to 4 give the burst name, the
class group of the burst, FORMULA , and T FORMULA.
Columns 5 and 6 give the best fit values of the normalization, Log FORMULA, and the
photon index,  FORMULA, with the corresponding one–dimensional symmetric standard
deviations in brackets, as obtained with the XSPEC FORMULA  command. In columns 7
and 8 we report the square root of the variances, FORMULA , together with the unitary vectors
FORMULA  (principal axes), which provide respectively the semi–axis lenghts and
directions of each axis (FORMULA ) of the joint error ellipse. The reduced FORMULA 
is reported in column 9.
As it may be appreciated from Table REF , the best–fit  FORMULA is smaller
than FORMULA  for 7 bursts out of the 47 (GRB 060906 is marginal and it will be
recovered by the CPL fitting).
Most likely, the FORMULA   spectra of these GRBs peak at energies below 15 keV.
They could be related to the X–ray rich events and X–ray Flashes
discovered by FORMULA SAX and HETE–2  (Kippen et al. 2001; Sakamoto et al. 2005).
We have also fitted the 47 GRB spectra to the CPL model and found
that for 18 bursts the fit produces too large uncertainties
and/or unphysical solutions. For these 18 cases the PL model is
definitively more reliable than the CPL one.
According to the results from our spectral fits (judged by the joint
68% CL contour errors), we classify the 47 Swift GRBs analysed here in four classes:
Class A – The CPL–model fit is acceptable and  FORMULA  is within the 15–150
keV range.
Class B – The CPL–model fit is acceptable, but FORMULA  keV.
Class C – the CPL–model fit gives unreliable results, while
the PL–model fit is acceptable and gives  FORMULAFORMULA , suggesting
that  FORMULA is at energies FORMULA  keV.
Class D – The CPL–model fit gives unreliable results, while the PL–model
fit is acceptable and gives  FORMULAFORMULA , suggesting that  FORMULA is smaller than 15 keV.
The class of each GRB is indicated in the second column of Table REF .
This classification can be easily understood after a visual inspection
of the plots shown in Appendix and figures REF  and REF .
In Figs. REF , REF , and REF  of the
Appendix we present the deconvolved time–integrated FORMULA   [or FORMULA ]
observed spectra of the 47 Swift GRBs analysed here. The CPL model was
used for the spectral deconvolution. The error bars show the observations
while the continuous lines show the fitted curves.
The spectra of all the events that we classify in groups A and B show
some curvature, evidence of a peak in the FORMULA  distribution. Nevertheless,
in most of the cases the formal FORMULA test analysis says that the spectral
fits from the PL model to the CPL one (which introduces one more
parameter,  FORMULA) do not improve significantly. Therefore, one expects
large uncertainties in the determination of  FORMULA  for most of the events
analyzed here. This is why it is important to carry out a
carefully statistical analysis of the errors and to adequately
propagate them for calculating composite quantities and inferring
correlations.
Figures REF  and REF  show different contours of the CLs projected
in the plane of the pair of variables FORMULA  vs. (FORMULA ) for each
burst in groups A and B (CPL model). The irregular CL contours (black lines
in the electronic version) were calculated with the XSPEC command FORMULA ,
while the elliptical CLs (red lines) were constructed from the joint variances and
principal axes given by the XSPEC command FORMULA  (see §§2.3; columns 5, 6, and
7 in Table REF  below). Thick lines show the CLs for FORMULA ,
while thin lines show the CLs for FORMULA .
For FORMULA , the projections of the CL regions in each axis
enclose FORMULA  of the one–dimensional probability for the given
parameter (one standard deviation), while for FORMULA , the plotted
region encompasses FORMULA  of the probability for the joint variation
of the two parameters (one standard deviation) {{cite:58ef41de-63ae-4688-8900-34fefcf90f5d}}.
As can be appreciated, the ellipses are a reasonable description of the CL regions
in most cases, with the great advantage that they are handled analytically.
We see from Figs. REF  and REF  that for many of the GRBs, the
Log FORMULA and  FORMULA spectral parameters are correlated (inclined, thin ellipses).
A similar situation arises for the other combination of parameters. Therefore, for
this kind of data, a simple statistical quantification of the errors, such as the
one–dimensional standard deviation, is not enough. This is why we have worked out
the full covariance matrix calculated from the error ellipse.
We use it to propagate errors in the calculation of  FORMULA and  FORMULA (§§2.3).
This is a crucial step when using the data, for instance, for
establishing correlations among the spectral or composite quantities (§§3.3).
The CPL–model fittings for GRB groups A and B are presented in Table REF .
Column 1 gives the burst names. Columns 2, 3, and 4 report the best fit values of
Log FORMULA,  FORMULA, and Log FORMULA  with their corresponding one–dimensional standard
deviations, as calculated with the XSPEC FORMULA  command. In columns 5, 6, and 7 we
report the lengths FORMULA  of each semi–axis together with the unitary vectors
FORMULA  (principal axes), which provide the directions of each axis
(FORMULA ). The reduced FORMULA  is reported in column 8 (dof = 57).
Finally, in Table REF  we report the calculated values for  FORMULA,
Log FORMULA, and Log FORMULA , as well as the corresponding
propagated errors for the samples A and B, using the CPL–model fit results
(see §2.3 for the used error propagation procedure).
Column 1 gives the burst name. Columns 2 and 3 give respectively the values of  FORMULA 
(in the observed range 15–150 keV) and of  FORMULA (extrapolated to the rest–frame
energy range 1–10000 keV) corresponding to the best fit spectral parameters.
Column 4 gives the value of the rest–frame peak energy,  FORMULA. The one–dimensional
standard deviationss of  FORMULA,  FORMULA, and  FORMULA are given within square brackets.
However, due to the high correlation among the errors the simple standard deviation
is not enough to characterize statistically the errors. Thus, in columns 5 and 6
we report the error ellipse elements (semi–axis lenghts, FORMULA , and principal
axes FORMULA , FORMULA ) associated to the pair of quantities Log FORMULA and Log FORMULA.
It is important to remark that
the correlation between the uncertainties of Log FORMULA and Log FORMULA is not entirely
due to the correlation among Log FORMULA,  FORMULA, and Log FORMULA. For instance an increase
in Log FORMULA alone is able to produce an increase in both Log FORMULA and Log FORMULA.
This effect will turn out to be helpful in the next section, where we will
study how Log FORMULA and Log FORMULA do correlate in the entire GRB sample.
The median and dispersion (quartiles) of the best–fit CPL parameter  FORMULA 
for the 24 + 5 classes A+B GRBs are FORMULA , which is in
agreement with the results from BATSE bright–GRB {{cite:f1208fa0-5b22-4a83-a194-77d53ef69a01}} and
HETE–2  GRB {{cite:a8550a1b-5b9b-475d-a393-ba5e9748820a}}, {{cite:32b76beb-0386-44cd-a97f-a30c8e690ecc}} time–integrated spectra. Our  FORMULA distribution is in particular similar to the one from HETE–2, with only FORMULA 
of the bursts having FORMULA .
The median and quartiles of the Log FORMULA [keV] parameter
are FORMULA . Unfortunately, due to the
low energy limit of the Swift–BAT, the sample analysed here covers only
the FORMULA  fraction of bursts in the (CPL–model)  FORMULA distribution inferred
for BATSE bright bursts {{cite:f1208fa0-5b22-4a83-a194-77d53ef69a01}}.
The distribution of  FORMULA (at rest) is much broader than the one of  FORMULA (the median and quartiles of Log FORMULA[keV] are FORMULA ).
This is expected due to the broad distribution in redshfits of the Swift bursts
analysed here. For our 24 + 5 classes A+B GRBs, the FORMULA  distribution has a
broad maximum at FORMULA ; the median and quartiles are FORMULA .
The median and quartiles of Log FORMULA [FORMULA  erg] for our 24 + 5 classes A+B
GRBs are FORMULA . For the 8 long–duration Swift GRBs in common with the compilation presented in Amati (2006b), the values
of  FORMULA  reported here and in that paper are similar, but those of  FORMULA  are
systematically larger in Amati (2006b). The latter difference is probably due to
the fact that Amati (2006b) did not use for most of those GRBs the spectral
information from the Swift  satellite but from other space missions (Konus, HETE–2),
which allowed to find a fitting with the Band model; as will be discussed
in §§3.3, this implies typically a larger  FORMULA  with respect to the case a
CPL model is used.
FIGURE 
Bursts detected also by other instruments
Among the bursts listed in Tables 2 and 3 there are four GRBs
which have been detected by other instruments besides Swift.
Three of them have been detected by Konus–Wind (GRB 050401, 050603 and 051109A)
and one by HETE–2  (GRB 050922C).
For GRB 050401 the Konus–Wind results reported by Golenetskii et al. (2005a)
concern the spectral parameters for the two peaks displayed by its light curve,
fitted with a Band model in the energy range [20–2000] keV. The first peak had
FORMULA , FORMULA  and FORMULA  keV,
while the second peak is described by
FORMULA , FORMULA  and FORMULA  keV.
Our analysis with the Swift  data (see Tab. 3) for the time integrated spectrum
and a CPL model yielded FORMULA  and FORMULA  keV.
Within the (relatively large) errors, the results are consistent.
The Konus–Wind data of GRB 050603 have been fitted by Golenetskii et al. (2005b)
with a Band model in the [20–3000] keV energy range, with
FORMULA , FORMULA  and FORMULA  keV.
Our analysis with a CPL model gives
FORMULA  and FORMULA  keV.
The derived low energy spectral index is somewhat softer, while the
value of FORMULA  is consistent.
GRB 050922C was detected by HETE–2  with the FREGATE instruments in the 7–30, 7–80,
and 30–400 keV bands. It was fitted with a CPL law model by Crew et al. (2005) with
FORMULA  and FORMULA  keV, to be compared
with our values of FORMULA  and FORMULA  keV.
Again, within the errors, there is consistency.
GRB 051109, detected by Konus–Wind and fitted with a CPL model by
Golenetskii et al. (2005c) in the [20–500] keV energy range, showed
FORMULA  and FORMULA  keV.
This should be compared with our FORMULA  and
FORMULA  keV.
Even in this case there is consistency, within the relatively large errors.

Peak energy vs spectral index
In Fig. REF  we show  FORMULA, derived with the CPL fit, as a function of
the spectral index FORMULA  of the CPL fit (top panel) and as
a function of FORMULA , the index derived when fitting with a single
power law. As can be seen, although there is no relation between  FORMULA and
FORMULA , a correlation appears when fitting with a single power law.
This correlation, however, has no physical meaning, since it is the result of
the attempt of the single power law to account for the data point above the peak,
with smaller flux (in FORMULA  ). As  FORMULA decreases, a larger fraction of data
lies above the peak, inducing the single power law to steepen. This also means
that this effect vanishes when  FORMULA is outside the Swift energy range, therefore
if we do not know  FORMULA, we cannot use this
correlation to infer it.
Furthermore, note the difference in the derived values of
the spectral indices.
As expected for these bursts for which we could derive  FORMULA,
the index FORMULA  is systematically softer than
FORMULA .
Given the obvious result of this subsection, we have considered
unnecessary to show the upper panel of Fig. REF  with the
FORMULA  CL error ellipses. A complete treatment of the errors in this
sense confirms the previous result.
FIGURE 

Correlation between  FORMULA and  FORMULA
In Fig. REF ,  FORMULA is plotted vs  FORMULA for the class A (red–line ellipses)
and class B (green–line ellipses) Swift  GRBs. The ellipses correspond to the joint
FORMULA  CL error
regions calculated as explained in §§2.3. The dotted straight lines encompass the
FORMULA  scatter of the updated Amati correlation presented in {{cite:886ad8b5-eb44-404d-ac0f-63a9cbff203a}}
for 49 GRBs; the central thin solid straight line is the best fit for that sample.
A visual inspection shows that the Swift  data analyzed in this
paper are indeed correlated in the  FORMULA– FORMULA  diagram.
Taking into account the uncertainties, no GRB may be classified as
outlier.
Eight GRBs show their central point above the FORMULA  strip, but taking
into account the FORMULA  CL contours as well as the fact that the spectral
fitting was performed using a CPL model instead of the Band one (see below),
make such GRBs compatible with the FORMULA  strip.
Notice that the 5 (marginal) class B events are not outliers. Therefore,
we may include them for a fit along with the 24 class A events.
The thick solid line in Fig. REF  is the best fit that we find
for the 29 class A and B GRBs.
The linear fit has been performed by an iterative minimum FORMULA  method,
where the coordinate origin of the data is shifted to the barycentre,
and the uncertainty component of each datapoint is calculated from the
corresponding error ellipse in the orthogonal direction of the straight
fitted line.
The dot–dashed line curves describe the standard error of the mean
values of the fit parameters computed in the barycentre of the data points.
The best fit in logarithmic quantities is:
FORMULA 
We point out the weight of GRB050525 in determining the best fit
due to its very–reduced spectral parameter uncertainties. We have also carried out
the linear fit for only the 24 class A GRBs:
FORMULA 
As expected, the fit is very similar to the one that includes the 5 class B GRBs.
Thus, a correlation between  FORMULA and  FORMULA is confirmed for 29 long GRBs
observed by the Swift satellite and homogeneously analyzed by us. The values
of the power–law index (FORMULA ) and normalization
(FORMULA  keV for  FORMULA  given in units of FORMULA erg, FORMULA )
corresponding to the best fit, lie in the ranges of values found with different
previous samples (see for a review of previous studies in Amati 2006a).
It is encouraging that with the Swift data, as analysed here, one obtains an
 FORMULA– FORMULA correlation fully consistent with the one obtained for GRBs observed
with other satellite detectors {{cite:3d0c529c-b4f2-44de-8ca7-f3de2340e9df}}, which had
a much broader energy (spectral) range than BAT. The errors
in the fit parameters reported in eqs. (REF ) and (REF ) are
at the 68% CL. These errors are somewhat larger than those reported
in Ghirlanda (2007) and Amati (2006a; note that therein the errors
are at the 90% CL).
In general, the scatter around the correlation obtained here is within the range
of different previous determinations of the Amati correlation.
The value of the reduced FORMULA  for the fit with the 29 class A+B
GRBs is FORMULA  close to the values
FORMULA  and FORMULA  obtained for larger
samples (43 and 49 GRBs) by Ghirlanda et al. (2006) and Ghirlanda (2007),
respectively.
We have also estimated the variance of our fit, FORMULA  {{cite:f49906c1-f075-487f-a860-7df418cf683b}},
by taking into account the joint variance of the data, i.e. the elliptical CL contours. For the
fit using the 24+5 GRBs, we find FORMULA  (dof=27). Note that for calculating
the deviations, we use orthogonal distances to the best–fitting line rather
than distances projected in the Log FORMULA  (Y) axis. An estimate of the vertical
1FORMULA  spread of the data around the best–fitting model would be
FORMULA , in agreement with previous estimates
{{cite:e203c8b8-727c-4408-b5bc-29186435d051}}.
The virtue of the Swift sample analysed here is its homogeneity,
in the sense of observations, reduction, and analysis. Previous
samples used to infer the  FORMULA– FORMULA  correlation were
constructed from different detectors, with an information collected from
different authors, who used different data processing and assumptions.
This heterogeneity in the data should introduce a spurious scatter.
In spite that the data used here have large observational errors, the
dispersion of our fit lies within the range of fits reported previously.
This is namely due to the homogeneity of the sample and because, having taken
into account the whole error ellipses associated to the data points,
it results that the major–axis orientation of most of these
ellipses is close to the direction of the correlation line.
Examining in more detail Fig. REF , one sees that the normalization of the
correlation found here [eq. (REF )] is slightly higher (by FORMULA  dex
at the sample median value of  FORMULA) than the previously established one. This is
indeed expected. Due to the narrow energy range of BAT, we had to force
the GRB spectra to be fitted by the CPL model, while most spectra could have been
better described by the Band model, if higher energies had been detected. It is
known that when fitting the CPL model to a spectrum whose shape is actually described
by the Band model, then (i)  FORMULA is larger than it would otherwise be, and (ii)
the low–energy power–law index FORMULA  is more negative than it would otherwise
be {{cite:66c68875-81a2-426e-8112-81eea2c2377a}}, {{cite:f1208fa0-5b22-4a83-a194-77d53ef69a01}}. On the other hand, (iii) in the CPL model the FORMULA   spectrum is cut–off
exponentially after the break energy  FORMULA, while in the Band model the spectrum
decreases as a power law. Item (i) implies directly that  FORMULA is likely
overestimated when the CPL model is used in the spectral analysis, and items (ii)
and (iii) imply that  FORMULA, which is calculated in the rest–frame energy range of
1–10000 keV by extrapolating the fitted spectrum, is likely underestimated.
In order to explore in a statistical sense the effect in the  FORMULA– FORMULA correlation of using the CPL model instead of the Band one for the
spectral fitting, we carried out the following experiment.
The time–averaged spectra of the 29 long GRBs that had a reasonable CPL–model
fit (groups A and B) were fitted with XSPEC to a Band model, but with the high–energy
power law index FORMULA  frozen to the typical value of FORMULA . As in the case of CPL,
we have modified the Band model in order to perform the fit for the logarithms of the
normalization and  FORMULA. Then, we followed the same procedures described
in §2 for handling the errors, taking into account the correlation
among them. Fig. REF  shows the final data points and their 68% CL
ellipses in the  FORMULA– FORMULA diagram. As expected, the normalization of the
 FORMULA– FORMULA correlation decreases (with respect to Fig. REF ), now being
almost equal to the one of the updated Amati relation given in {{cite:886ad8b5-eb44-404d-ac0f-63a9cbff203a}}
for the range of  FORMULA values studied here. The best fit in logarithmic quantities is:
FORMULA 
FIGURE 

Summary and Conclusions
We have analysed homogeneously the time–integrated spectra of a relatively large
sample of long–duration GRBs with known redshift obtained by a same detector,
the Swift–BAT instrument. We have carried out spectral fits to 47 GRBs by using
the two–parameter PL and three–parameter CPL photon models. Due to the narrow
spectral range of BAT, 15–150 keV, only two– or three–parameter models can
give reliable fits. However, even in these cases, large uncertainties are expected
in the fitted parameters, making the study of the (highly correlated) errors
important. We have performed Monte Carlo simulations in order to propagate the
errors and calculate composite quantities such as  FORMULA and  FORMULA.
The main results and conclusions are as follow:
FORMULA  For 29 GRBs (classes A+B) out of the 47 bursts analysed here, the CPL model,
which identifies a peak energy  FORMULA  in the FORMULA  spectrum, gives reliable fits, though
in 5 cases (class B), the best fit value for  FORMULA  lies beyond the upper limit (150 keV)
of the BAT energy band. The uncertainties in the fitted parameters are in most cases
highly correlated among them.
FORMULA  The spectra of the remaining 18 bursts (classes C+D) are well fitted by the
simple PL
model. For 11 bursts (class C) of the 47 GRBs, the best PL–fit value of the photon index
 FORMULA  is greater than FORMULA , suggesting that FORMULA  keV.
The other 7 bursts (class D) show a photon index  FORMULA  lower than FORMULA 
which implies a decreasing power–law FORMULA  spectrum in the
analysed energy range. In these cases, the peak energy could lie in the X–ray range.
FORMULA  The fluence,  FORMULA, and rest–frame isotropic equivalent energy,  FORMULA, as
well as their uncertainties, were calculated for the 29 (classes A+B) GRBs with
reliable fits to the CPL model. This is currently the largest homogeneous
sample of long GRBs with determined spectral parameters and  FORMULA. The mean
values of the rest peak energy FORMULA and  FORMULA in the sample are FORMULA  keV and FORMULA  erg, respectively.
FORMULA  The  FORMULA as inferred from the CPL fit and
FORMULA  as inferred from the PL fit do correlate.
However, this correlation is not physical, but is the result of the
attempt of the single PL to account for the data points above the peak,
with smaller flux. As  FORMULA decreases, a larger fraction of data
lies above the peak, inducing the single power law to steepen.
Therefore, the correlation should not be used to infer  FORMULA when
knowing only FORMULA . Indeed, we show that  FORMULA  and
FORMULA  do not correlate.
FORMULA  A correlation between  FORMULA and  FORMULA (the 'Amati' relation) is
confirmed for our sample [Eq. (REF )]. This correlation and
its scatter are consistent with
the ones established previously for non–Swift bursts, showing that the
 FORMULA– FORMULA correlation is hardly an artifact of selection effects.
The zero–point of our correlation (in Log–Log) is larger by FORMULA  dex at
the sample median value of  FORMULA than the latest updated
“Amati” correlation {{cite:886ad8b5-eb44-404d-ac0f-63a9cbff203a}}.
This difference is expected due to the use of a CPL model for
describing the observed spectra instead of the Band model.
FORMULA  When the Band model with the high–energy photon index frozen to
FORMULA  is fitted to the spectra of our 29 (classes A+B) GRBs, the zero–point of the
resultant  FORMULA– FORMULA correlation becomes smaller than in the case of the CPL model.
For the Band model, the obtained  FORMULA– FORMULA correlation
is given by Eq. (REF ),
which is virtually indistinct from the 'Amati' correlation established
previously for uneven observable data-sets from different satellites.
Although in this work we were able to process homogeneously the spectra of a
significant fraction of the Swift  GRBs with known redshift, the sample is still
limited for conclusive results regarding the physical meaning of the correlations
among the burst observable properties. During the refereeing process of this work,
appeared a paper by {{cite:2295aaa3-bd7b-4d9a-9145-5ca26bbaf5a7}}, where the author finds evidence of significant
change in the 'Amati' correlation parameters with redshift for the heterogeneous
sample of 48 GRBs compiled by {{cite:e203c8b8-727c-4408-b5bc-29186435d051}}. The number of GRBs with known
redshifts and full spectral information obtained homogeneously should increase in
order to attain more conclusive results.

Acknowledgments
JIC and VA-R gratefully acknowledge the hospitality extended by
Osservatorio Astronomico di Brera in Merate during research stays.
JIC is supported by a CONACyT (Mexico) fellowship.
We are grateful to the anonymous Referee for his/her comments,
which helped to correct some bugs in the processed data and
to improve the manuscript. This work
was supported by the PAPIIT–UNAM grant IN107706-3 to VA-R, and by an
italian 2005 PRIN–INAF grant. The authors acknowledge the use of the
Swift publicly available data as well as the public XSPEC
software package. We thank J. Benda for grammar corrections to
the manuscript.

The observed spectra
In this Appendix section we present the 47 Swift  spectra (see Table REF )
analysed here. As described in §2, the 60 energy channels in the range 15–150
keV of the BAT detector are used to deconvolve the spectra. The spectral fluxes
were averaged over the integration time, T FORMULA, determined for each burst from its
light curve (see §2). In Figs. REF , REF , and
REF , the CPL model was used to fit the observed spectra.
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
