
PHASE STRING THEORY FOR DOPED ANTIFERROMAGNETS
Zheng-Yu Weng
Center for Advanced Study, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2020/09/07 18:37:18
The recent developments of the phase string theory for doped
antiferromagnets will be briefly reviewed. Such theory is built upon a
singular phase string effect induced by the motion of holes in a doped
antiferromagnet, which as a precise property of the FORMULA -FORMULA  model dictates
the novel competition between the charge and spin degrees of freedom. A
global phase diagram including the antiferromagnetic, superconducting, lower
and upper pseudogap, and high-temperature “normal” phases, as well as a series of anomalous physical
properties of these phases will be presented as the self-consistent and
systematic consequences of the phase string theory.
INTRODUCTION
Since the discovery of high-FORMULA  superconductivity two decades ago, a
great effort has been put into the search for a unified microscopic
mechanism for both superconductivity as well as anomalous spin and charge
properties in the cuprates.
In this paper, I shall review a systematic endeavor along a particular line
approaching the doped Mott insulator/doped antiferromagnet, which has been
proposed{{cite:9f75e1f1-7f79-4cca-940d-61d06a988ec2}} as the unique property of the cuprates due to the
strong Coulomb interaction. It has gradually become a consensus that the
doped Mott insulator physics holds the key to understanding the cuprate
superconductor, and distinguishes the latter from a conventional BCS
superconductor.
The present line, known as the phase string theory, will be
characteristically different from the main-stream approach to a doped Mott
insulator. The latter has been mainly built on the resonating valence bond
(RVB) pairing of fermionic spins and the spin-charge separation in
the early proposals,{{cite:9f75e1f1-7f79-4cca-940d-61d06a988ec2}}, {{cite:74d7e2a1-8700-45b3-8f16-aa6111ee1d5c}}, {{cite:5fa7541f-e002-4629-8bc1-c0de1f37e8f6}} the latest
developments of which have been summarized and reviewed in Refs. {{cite:34924483-2048-4195-94ec-fce126f19215}}, {{cite:110ddfd1-5420-4ed9-802d-42230034ce99}}.
The phase string theory, on the other hand, has been built on a singular
nonlocal effect hidden in a typical doped Mott insulator, e.g., the FORMULA -FORMULA  model. This effect is largely omitted in other approaches, but is
critical in constructing a self-consistent theory of the doped
antiferromagnet evolving continuously from the half-filling
Mott-antiferromagnetic insulator. I shall present a rich phase diagram with
complex phenomena as the physical consequences of the phase string effect.
One will see that the RVB and spin-charge separation concepts remain
essential, but they will also acquire a distinct mathematical
characterization in this theory.
Although the leading order results of the phase string theory share some
striking similarity with the experimental measurements in the cuprates, in
this review, a direct comparison with experiment will be minimal,
partly due to the length limitation and partly because I wish to emphasize
that the physical consequences naturally flow from the theoretical
structure, not from a phenomenology based on the experiment. I will not be
able to discuss many interesting theoretical efforts along different lines of thought in this brief review, also due to the space limitation,
which may be found through our original papers in the references.
The rest of the paper will be organized as follows. In Sec. 2, I will
discuss some important general properties of the FORMULA -FORMULA  model, including
the Marshall sign rule, bosonic RVB description, phase string effect, and
exact phase string formalism. In Sec. 3, based on the phase string
formalism, I will describe how an effective theory, known as the phase
string model, is constructed. In Sec. 4, the physical consequences of the
phase string model will be given which cover the superconducting phase,
lower and upper pseudogap phases, high-temperature normal state, as well as
low-doping antiferromagnetic state. Finally, a synthesis and perspectives
are presented in Sec. 5.

GENERAL PROPERTIES OF THE FORMULA -FORMULA  MODEL
The FORMULA -FORMULA  model is defined by FORMULA :
FORMULA 
and
FORMULA 
with a restricted Hilbert space under the no double occupancy constraint
FORMULA 
Due to the no double occupancy constraint, the FORMULA -FORMULA  model describes a
Mott insulator at half filling with FORMULA , where the hopping term FORMULA  and the
superexchange term FORMULA  depicts the Heisenberg antiferromagnetic (AF)
interaction in the unfrozen spin degrees of freedom. Away from the half
filling, charge carriers are introduced with removing or injecting electrons
into the system, which are known as the hole or electron-doped Mott
insulators. Since the half-filling case is an AF spin state, the doped
system can be also properly called a doped antiferromagnet.
For a bipartite lattice with only the nearest-neighboring (nn) hopping and
superexchange couplings [denoted by FORMULA  in Eqs. (REF ) and (REF )], there exists a particle-hole symmetry and one
may only focus on the hole-doped side without loss of generality. Note that
the next nn hopping may be important in real materials and its effect will
be commented on in Sec. 5.
Half-Filling: A Bosonic RVB Description
At half-filling, the FORMULA -FORMULA  model reduces to the Heisenberg model, where
the physical properties are fairly well understood, as a consensus, in
contrast to the doped case. This model predicts a long-range Néel order
in the ground state as well as low-lying spin-wave excitations, consistent
with experiment.
It is important to point out that in the study of the doped case, one needs
to have a correct description of spin correlations not only at long
distance, but at all ranges. This is because the hole hopping in FORMULA  involves the nn sites, which will be generally quite sensitive to
the short-range spin correlations. Thus, as a starting point, a precise
description of both long and short range spin correlations at half-filling
is essential.
Marshall sign rule
As proven by Marshall,{{cite:c02c03e3-66d5-4d7d-a6a4-815cdbda98f5}} the ground-state wave function of the
Heisenberg model for a bipartite lattice must be real and satisfies a sign
rule. This sign rule dictates that the flip of a pair of antiparallel spins
at two opposite sublattice sites will always be accompanied by a sign change
in the wave function.
This Marshall sign rule may be easily understood as below. Define a spin
basis state with the built-in Marshall signs as
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  denotes the total number of down spins at the FORMULA 
sublattice such that the aforementioned Marshall sign rule is always
satisfied. Then it is straightforward to verify that the matrix element of FORMULA  under the complete set FORMULA  is negative definite
FORMULA 
so that for the ground state
FORMULA 
the wave function FORMULA  is always real and positive (except for a
trivial global phase).

Liang-Doucot-Anderson wave function
While the exact ground state of the Heisenberg model in two dimensions (2D)
is not known, the best variational state proposed by Liang, Doucot and
Anderson is given by{{cite:76fb2caa-ec38-4edb-ac6d-5ce51d2da34f}}
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  stands for a singlet spin pairing at two opposite sublattice
sites FORMULA  and FORMULA , and FORMULA , the positive weight factor associated with
it. Since each singlet bond FORMULA  automatically satisfies the Marshall sign
rule, the total wave function can be easily shown to obey the sign rule as
well.
The variational wave function in Eq. (REF ) can produce{{cite:76fb2caa-ec38-4edb-ac6d-5ce51d2da34f}} an
unrivaled accurate ground-state energy (FORMULA  per bond as compared to
the exact numerical value of FORMULA  per bond for the Heisenberg model).
Since the energy of the Heisenberg model is directly related to the nn
spin-spin correlation, a good variational energy also means a good
description of short-range spin correlations. On the other hand, this wave
function possesses an AF long-range order (AFLRO) in the spin correlation
function with a similarly accurate magnetization as the system size is
extrapolated to infinity.{{cite:76fb2caa-ec38-4edb-ac6d-5ce51d2da34f}}

Doping: Phase String Effect
Now let us consider doping. In the above we have seen that the ground state
wave function of the Heisenberg model satisfies the Marshall sign. In fact,
such a Marshall sign rule would hold even at arbitrary doping, if holes
remain static on lattice sites. Consider the single hole case for example.
Define the following spin basis incorporating the Marshall signs similar to
Eq. (REF )
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  denotes the hole site. Then it is straightforward to check that
FORMULA 
still holds to ensure the Marshall sign rule.
But once the hole starts to move, the Marshall sign rule will be scrambled
by the hopping of the hole. Indeed, based on Eq. (REF ) the
hopping matrix is given by
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the site FORMULA  spin index in the state FORMULA , and FORMULA  is different from FORMULA  by an exchange of the spin FORMULA  with the hole at site FORMULA  Since FORMULA , the hopping matrix element is no longer sign definite.
Based on Eq. (REF ), a hole hops on the lattice will pick up a
product of sequential FORMULA  and FORMULA  signs,{{cite:cc982dff-b8b5-4558-854d-6dd32effc89f}}
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the number of FORMULA  spins which are
exchanged with the hole during its hopping on a given path FORMULA . Because of
Eq. (REF ), the superexchange interaction cannot “repair” such a phase string effect created by the
nn hole hopping.{{cite:cc982dff-b8b5-4558-854d-6dd32effc89f}}
For example, the single-hole propagator FORMULA  with FORMULA  may be formally expressed as
FORMULA 
in which for each path FORMULA  connecting FORMULA  and FORMULA  there is a phase string
factor FORMULA  weighted by FORMULA 
with
FORMULA 
at FORMULA , whose proof is based on Eq. (REF ).{{cite:cc982dff-b8b5-4558-854d-6dd32effc89f}}
Here FORMULA  denotes the ground-state energy when the hole remains static. Similarly, the total energy FORMULA  of the state at a
momentum FORMULA  can be also formally expressed in terms of the
Wigner-Brillouin expansion as{{cite:117ad3b8-4c09-43cb-8871-12832247466e}}
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA 
with a positive semi-definite weight functional
FORMULA 
Physically, the phase string effect represents the transverse spin
mismatches created by the motion of the hole on the AF background, in
additional to the mismatches in the FORMULA  component.{{cite:cc982dff-b8b5-4558-854d-6dd32effc89f}} The
irreparableness of the phase string means that the three components of the
spin defect induced by the motion of the hole cannot be simultaneously
repaired via the spin flips in the superexchange term. It has been concluded
that either the quasiparticle weight vanishes{{cite:cc982dff-b8b5-4558-854d-6dd32effc89f}} or the doped hole
is self-localized{{cite:117ad3b8-4c09-43cb-8871-12832247466e}} due to the phase string effect in a spin
background with long-range AF correlation (in the half-filling limit).
One can similarly demonstrate the irreparable phase string effect in an
arbitrary multi-hole case although the formulation will be slightly
modified with the emergence of an extra sign factor FORMULA  in additional to FORMULA , where FORMULA  is the number of the exchanges between the holes and FORMULA  here
denotes the multi-hole paths.{{cite:363e10d4-e2bc-4d11-ac30-84660e4afbf7}}
The significant role of the phase string factor FORMULA 
in Eqs. (REF ) and (REF ) is to cause strong phase
interference between different hole paths and thus greatly influence the
charge dynamics. But since the spin degrees of freedom are involved in FORMULA , the spin correlations will also get simultaneously reshaped to minimize the total kinetic and superexchange
energy. Therefore, the irreparable phase string effect will play a role to
mediate nonlocal mutual influence between the charge and spin degrees
of freedom as a new kind of interaction which emerges from the
strongly correlated system of doped Mott insulator/antiferromagnet.
The factor FORMULA  is very singular, as a
fluctuation in FORMULA  by FORMULA  can result in a total sign
change. So the quantum fluctuations are normally extremely strong especially
for long paths, and there is no well-controlled quantum many-body method to
directly handle such an effect. Alternatively a unitary transformation FORMULA  can be explicitly introduced{{cite:cc982dff-b8b5-4558-854d-6dd32effc89f}}
to precisely keep track of the phase string effect. Then, with the Marshall
sign basis FORMULA  [cf, Eq. (REF )] being changed
to FORMULA , the new
ground-state wave function FORMULA  in FORMULA  should become more
or less “conventional” as the singular
phase string effect is now sorted out into FORMULA .
The FORMULA -FORMULA  Hamiltonian in this new representation, known as the phase
string formalism,{{cite:cc982dff-b8b5-4558-854d-6dd32effc89f}} is expected to be perturbatively treatable as
the singular part of the phase string effect is “gauged
away” by the unitary transformation. In the following, we
shall present such an exact reformulation of the FORMULA -FORMULA  Hamiltonian at
arbitrary doping.

Phase string formalism
The phase string formalism is equivalent to “bosonizing” the electron operator as follows{{cite:cc982dff-b8b5-4558-854d-6dd32effc89f}}
FORMULA 
where “holon” FORMULA 
and “spinon” FORMULA  operators are
both bosonic fields, satisfying the constraint
FORMULA 
The nonlocal phase string factor FORMULA  in Eq. (REF ) is defined by
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA 
and
FORMULA 
in which FORMULA  and FORMULA  are spinon and holon number
operators respectively, at site FORMULA  with FORMULA  a complex
coordinate on the lattice.
It is easily verified that the fermionic statistics of FORMULA  is
automatically ensured by FORMULA , in which the factor
FORMULA  (FORMULA  is the total holon number operator)
guarantees anticommutation relations between opposite spins, and the factor FORMULA  (for FORMULA  even/odd) is a staggered factor added for
convenience. Furthermore, the equality (REF ) replaces the original
no double occupancy constraint (REF ) imposed on the electron
operator. Therefore, this is an exact representation of the electron
operator in the Hilbert space constrained by the no double occupancy
condition.
Nontrivial gauge structure
Rewriting the FORMULA  model using this new electron decomposition (REF ), one gets{{cite:cc982dff-b8b5-4558-854d-6dd32effc89f}}
FORMULA 
and
FORMULA 
with
FORMULA 
Here the three link fields defined on the nn sites are given by
FORMULA 
FORMULA 
and
FORMULA 
The strengths of these link fields can be obtained as follows
FORMULA 
and
FORMULA 
for an arbitrary closed loop FORMULA  such that the fluxes enclosed, FORMULA  FORMULA  and FORMULA , are determined by the number
of spinons and holons respectively, in the region FORMULA  enclosed by
the loop FORMULA . Furthermore, the phase FORMULA  describes a constant
flux with a strength FORMULA  per plaquette:
FORMULA 
The unique feature in the above phase string formalism of the FORMULA  model is
the emergence of three link fields: FORMULA , FORMULA  and FORMULA . Without them, there should be no nontrivial sign problem
in the Hamiltonian, because FORMULA  and FORMULA  are both bosonic fields. Namely the
matrix elements of FORMULA  would be real and negative-definite in the
occupation number representation of FORMULA  and FORMULA . Consequently, the ground
state expanded in terms of these bosonic fields would have real and positive
coefficients, which is the case at half-filling as discussed above and the
one-dimensional (1D) case to be discussed below.
It is easy to see that the Hamiltonian FORMULA  is invariant under U(1)FORMULA U(1) gauge transformations:
FORMULA 
and
FORMULA 
Thus FORMULA  and FORMULA  are gauge fields, seen by holons and
spinons respectively, as the latter carry their gauge charges according to (REF ) and (REF ).
Here FORMULA  and FORMULA  are not independent gauge fields with
their own dynamics. Rather they are directly connected to the matter fields
as a pair of mutual topological gauge fields. The term
“mutual” refers to the fact that FORMULA  describes quantized FORMULA  fluxoids attached to the spinons,
coupled to the holons. Conversely, FORMULA  describes quantized FORMULA 
fluxoids bound to the holons, coupled to the spinons.
By the construction, the phase string formalism is defined in a Hilbert
space where the total FORMULA  is an eigen operator.{{cite:cc982dff-b8b5-4558-854d-6dd32effc89f}} So the
total numbers of FORMULA  and FORMULA  spinons are conserved
respectively, such that the topological gauge field FORMULA  behaves
smoothly as defined in (REF ). It is also consistent with the gauge
invariance under (REF ). Different FORMULA  states can be connected by
the spin flip operators, defined in the phase-string representation as
FORMULA 
(a factor FORMULA  has been dropped for simplicity) and FORMULA , and FORMULA . These definitions follow from (REF ). The nonlocal phase FORMULA  in (REF ) will play a
crucial role in restoring the spin rotational symmetry.
Finally, the superconducting order parameter can be expressed in the phase
string representation as follows
FORMULA 
with the amplitude operator given by
FORMULA 
(again the factor FORMULA  is omitted).

One-dimensional case
In the 1D case, one may define
FORMULA 
such that
FORMULA 
Thus there is no sign problem in the phase string representation of the FORMULA -FORMULA  model. It implies that the Hamiltonian may be treated within a
“mean field” approximation.{{cite:cc982dff-b8b5-4558-854d-6dd32effc89f}}
Namely the holons and spinons defined in the phase string representation of
the FORMULA -FORMULA  model may be regarded as the true “free” elementary excitations.
However, the correlation functions will be highly nontrivial because of the
singular phase string effect, which is now precisely kept in the phase
factor of the decomposition (REF ) with{{cite:cc982dff-b8b5-4558-854d-6dd32effc89f}}
FORMULA 
in which
FORMULA 
and
FORMULA 
Thus, to create a hole by FORMULA  according to Eq. (REF ), means the creation of a pair of holon and spinon excitations together
with a nonlocal phase shift. Denoting the average hole concentration
FORMULA , the phase string factor in
Eq. (REF ) can be rewritten as
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA 
is the Fermi momentum (FORMULA  is the lattice constant) and
FORMULA 
with FORMULA . While the leading term
of the phase string factor reproduces the correct Fermi momentum FORMULA  for the electron system, the fluctuations in FORMULA  will
be responsible for reproducing{{cite:cc982dff-b8b5-4558-854d-6dd32effc89f}} the correct Luttinger
liquid behavior known from the large-FORMULA  Hubbard model.
The important connection between the phase string effect and the Luttinger
liquid in 1D has been first established previously in a path-integral study{{cite:873383e5-0244-4c16-a124-8011c69016aa}} of the large-FORMULA  Hubbard model.

Two-dimensional case
At half-filling, FORMULA  has no contribution due to the no double occupancy
constraint, and under a proper gauge choice one may set FORMULA  in FORMULA . In this limit, there is no nontrivial sign problem in the 2D
Hamiltonian which is fully bosonized. This is the case previously
discussed in Sec. 2.1, where a precise bosonic RVB description of spin
correlations in all ranges of length scale is available, which can serve a
very good starting point for the doped case in 2D.
In contrast to the full bosonization case at half-filling, as well as in the
1D case, the nontrivial phase structure emerges at finite doping in 2D,
which are represented by the link fields, FORMULA , FORMULA ,
and FORMULA  These link phases can no longer be “gauged away” here and they completely capture the
essential sign problem (i.e., the phase string effect) of the doped FORMULA -FORMULA  model. These gauge fields are generally well controlled in the
regimes of our interest: FORMULA  is a non-dynamic phase describing
a constant FORMULA  flux per plaquette; FORMULA  is cancelled when spinons
are RVB paired at low-temperature phases; FORMULA  remains weak at small
doping or well behaves if the holons are coherent. Therefore, these gauge
fields will be well tractable at least in low doping and low temperature
regimes.
It is noted that the bosonization decomposition (REF ) was
actually first obtained{{cite:299bf369-2748-4eac-9277-b6affef46b7a}} based on optimizing a slave-boson
mean-field state using a “flux binding” scheme. Similar procedure has been also employed recently to get essentially
the same bosonization decomposition in Ref. {{cite:ca34af01-53b9-4515-a1e6-bd75e02b6832}}. This bosonization
decomposition may be also regarded as the mutual-semion scheme as
described in Ref. {{cite:cc982dff-b8b5-4558-854d-6dd32effc89f}} without explicitly breaking the
time-reversal symmetry. It is thus clearly distinguished{{cite:299bf369-2748-4eac-9277-b6affef46b7a}} from an
earlier flux-binding construction leading to a slave-semion type of
formulation,{{cite:3f51872d-99f6-4f58-8d55-3fa4872167b9}} or a variant of it in a more complicated semionic
representation proposed{{cite:ee88d073-a889-4c7c-9a10-321cc8b0dda5}} in literature.

Wave function structure
In the above, we have discussed how the intrinsic phase
structure of the FORMULA -FORMULA  model can be revealed in the exact phase string
formalism. In the following we further examine the corresponding wave
function structure.
A wave function FORMULA  in the electron FORMULA -operator representation can
be related to FORMULA  in the full bosonic FORMULA  and FORMULA  representation of
the phase string formalism by{{cite:13125b62-aabd-416f-a9c7-549995afc8e6}}
FORMULA 
where the FORMULA  spin electron sites, FORMULA  and the FORMULA  spin sites, FORMULA  and FORMULA 
denote the empty sites that are not independent from FORMULA  and FORMULA  under the no double occupancy constraint. Here and below, we use FORMULA  to specify an FORMULA  spin, FORMULA  a FORMULA  spin, and FORMULA , a
holon, where the subscripts FORMULA , FORMULA , and FORMULA  label the sequences of the FORMULA  spins, FORMULA  spins, and holons, respectively.
According to Eq. (REF ), the FORMULA  factor is given by{{cite:13125b62-aabd-416f-a9c7-549995afc8e6}}
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA 
and
FORMULA 
in which the coefficient FORMULA  is given by
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  and FORMULA  running through all lattice sites such that FORMULA 
is a constant.
It is easily seen that the Jastrow-like factors in FORMULA 
automatically enforce the single occupancy constraint: FORMULA 
vanishes if two spinons (or holons) occupy the same site, or if a holon and
a spinon occupy the same site. The factor FORMULA  further explicitly
captures the fermionic statistics of the electrons. Therefore, the no double
occupancy constraint, which has been considered as one of the most important
effects but difficult to tackle with in the FORMULA -FORMULA  model, is no longer
important in the phase string representation FORMULA , since FORMULA 
in (REF ) naturally plays the role of a projection operator. This
may be understood in the following way. In the phase string representation,
the effect of FORMULA  in the original FORMULA , is transformed into
the topological gauge fieldsFORMULA  FORMULA  and FORMULA  in the
Hamiltonians, (REF ) and (REF ), which describe spinons and holons
as mutual vortices, as perceived by each other. This clearly implies a
mutual repulsion between two species, since a spinon cannot stay at
the center of its vortex (where a holon is located), and vice versa. Thus the constraint that a holon and a spinon cannot occupy the same site
is now reflected in the interactions present in the new Hamiltonian,
and the condition (REF ) is not needed as an extra condition to
enforce. Note that the constraint (REF ) also requires the hard core
conditions among the holons or spinons themselves. But since both holon and
spinon fields are bosonic fields, local hard core exclusions usually do not
involve the sign change of the wave function. Hence, in the phase string
representation, the local constraint (REF ) is neither crucial nor
singular, as far as low energy physics is concerned.
Finally, the singular phase string effect is captured by the factor FORMULA  in FORMULA . Firstly the sign factor FORMULA  can be identified with the Marshall sign, and FORMULA  denotes the total number of FORMULA  spins in sublattice FORMULA  (note
that it is equivalent to the previous definition using FORMULA  by a trivial global sign factor). Then the phase factor FORMULA 
will describe the phase string effect – disordered Marshall sign. Note that
it is asymmetric with regard to FORMULA  and FORMULA  spins: it only
involves an FORMULA  spin complex coordinate FORMULA  and a
holon coordinate FORMULA , and then will acquire the following
additional phase as a hole moves through a closed path FORMULA , FORMULA , with the displaced spins
being restored to the original configuration by the exchange term FORMULA .{{cite:13125b62-aabd-416f-a9c7-549995afc8e6}}

Phase String Model: Effective Theory
The exact phase-string formalism of the FORMULA -FORMULA  Hamiltonian provides a new
starting point to construct an effective theory which can be smoothly
connected to the better-understood half-filling limit. The gauge
structure in the phase-string formalism is a very useful guide for such a
construction as it generally cannot be spontaneously broken according to the
Elitzur's theorem.
Phase string model
Based on the FORMULA -FORMULA  Hamiltonian in the phase string formalism, a minimal effective model may be written down as follows{{cite:dea5ea1d-ed32-462d-8af9-34b8e74b79dd}}, {{cite:13125b62-aabd-416f-a9c7-549995afc8e6}}
FORMULA 
with
FORMULA 
This model remains invariant under the gauge transformations, (REF )
and (REF ), and is thus a gauge model, known as the phase string
model.
The U(1)FORMULA U(1) gauge invariance here corresponds to
the charge and spin FORMULA  conservations of the holons and spinons,
respectively, which ensures the correct quantum numbers in such a
spin-charge separation description. This is in contrast to the slave-boson
U(1) gauge theory{{cite:7f6ceb1b-b4ce-4533-92f7-2fa2f5a8a5c5}} where both holon and spinon carry
partial charges. In Eq. (REF ), an external electromagnetic gauge
potential FORMULA  is explicitly introduced which couples to the holon
field carrying an electric charge FORMULA  By contrast, the spinon field does
not carry the electric charge and thus describes a charge neutral and spin-FORMULA  object, which can directly couple to the external magnetic field FORMULA 
only by a Zeeman term
FORMULA 
Note that, without loss of generality, the magnetic field will be always
added along the spin quantization FORMULA  axis due to the requirement of the
FORMULA  conservation in the phase string formulation.
The global conditions of
FORMULA 
can be added to FORMULA  and FORMULA  by the Lagrangian multipliers, FORMULA  and FORMULA  respectively. Due to the relaxation of the local no
double occupancy constraint, to avoid the short-distance uncertainty at each
center of a FORMULA -flux tube, on the right-hand sides of Eqs. (REF )
and (REF ), the distribution of a holon or spinon at site FORMULA  should
be understood as being slightly smeared within a small area centered
at FORMULA .
Based on the spin operators defined in the phase string representation like
Eq. (REF ), It is straightforward to verify the spin rotational
invariance of the phase string model
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  by noting that FORMULA  (using the fact that the core of each
flux-tube being slightly smeared within a small area as mentioned above).
The time-reversal symmetry at FORMULA  can be also easily verified by
noting that FORMULA , FORMULA , FORMULA , and FORMULA 
according to their definitions, under the time-reversal transformation.

Topological gauge structure and mutual Chern-Simons description
The phase string model is uniquely featured by the two topological gauge
fields, FORMULA  and FORMULA . According to Eqs. (REF ) and (REF ), the holons in (REF ) feel the presence of the spinons as
quantized FORMULA  fluxoids through FORMULA , which reflects the nonlocal
frustrations of the spin background on the kinetic energy of the charge
degrees of freedom. Vice versa the spinons also perceive the doped
holes as FORMULA  flux quanta through FORMULA  which represents the
dynamic frustrations of the doped holes on the spin degrees of freedom.
It is instructive to reformulate the above phase string model in the
following path-integral formalism{{cite:0d864396-bee8-45de-929d-1c55e1cfc867}}
FORMULA 
in which the Euclidean Lagrangian of the phase string model is given by
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA 
For simplicity, two chemical potential terms enforcing the global
constraints (REF ) and () are not included in FORMULA .
In such a Lagrangian formalism, two matter fields, bosonic spinons and
holons, are minimally coupled to the FORMULA  gauge fields, FORMULA  and
FORMULA , whose gauge structure is decided by the mutual-Chern-Simons term FORMULA  in (), in replacement of the original
topological constraints (REF ) and (REF ). So the phase string
theory is also known as the mutual Chern-Simons theory. The time-reversal,
parity, and spin rotational symmetries can be explicitly shown to be
preserved.{{cite:0d864396-bee8-45de-929d-1c55e1cfc867}}
Note that the original constraints (REF ) and (REF ) can be
obtained by the equations of motion for the temporal components FORMULA 
and FORMULA :
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  and FORMULA  Here the indices FORMULA  and FORMULA  are used to denote the spatial components (FORMULA , FORMULA ),
and the lattice gauge fields FORMULA  (FORMULA ) and FORMULA  (FORMULA ). The lattice sites FORMULA  and FORMULA  refer to two sets of “dual” lattices where the holons and spinons live on,
respectively, which is a technical way to “regulate” the theory at the short-distance, which is not
expected to change the low-energy physics.{{cite:0d864396-bee8-45de-929d-1c55e1cfc867}}

Bosonic RVB order parameter
To justify the above phase string model, let us first consider the
superexchange term FORMULA  in Eq. (REF ).
FORMULA  is expressed in terms of the RVB operator FORMULA 
which is invariant under the gauge transformation (REF ). It is
natural to define the bosonic RVB order parameter{{cite:dea5ea1d-ed32-462d-8af9-34b8e74b79dd}}
FORMULA 
for nn sites. At half filling, FORMULA  reduces to the well-known
Schwinger-boson mean-field order parameter{{cite:2737c8e0-5c2b-4139-986e-054e74ab16cb}} FORMULA 
as FORMULA  FORMULA . Since FORMULA  up to a temperature FORMULA  at half-filling, FORMULA  defined in Eq. (REF ) is expected to survive and persist into a finite doping and lower
temperature regime.
It is interesting to distinguish the Schwinger-boson order parameter and the
bosonic RVB order parameter at finite doping. By using the
aforementioned unitary transformation{{cite:cc982dff-b8b5-4558-854d-6dd32effc89f}} FORMULA , the Schwinger-boson order parameter can be expressed
in the phase string formalism as
FORMULA 
with FORMULA . So FORMULA  and FORMULA  differ by a phase factor which is composed of FORMULA  vortices
with the cores located at the hole sites, FORMULA 's, with FORMULA . Namely,
each doped hole will induce a FORMULA  vortex in the Schwinger-boson order
parameter. The general topological vortex excitation in the Schwinger-boson
mean-field state has been previously discussed by Ng.{{cite:8b90660c-fa18-4fba-b272-e34065657f76}} The case that
a doped hole is bound to the vortex core has been discussed as one of
several possibilities there. It turns out that since the bare hole
will induce a highly frustrated phase string effect, its binding with a
topological vortex will be stabilized, as the composite object can
effectively erase the singular effect and is thus in favor of the
kinetic energy. Such a composite object is nothing but the bosonic holon in
the present phase string formalism. Generally the bosonic RVB state with FORMULA  means that the original Schwinger-boson order parameter
is phase disordered with FORMULA  according to Eq. (REF ), unless the holons are localized which corresponds to a
low-doping AF state to be discussed in Sec. 4.5.
Based on Eq. (REF ), a “mean-field” version of the superexchange Hamiltonian may
be rewritten as{{cite:dea5ea1d-ed32-462d-8af9-34b8e74b79dd}}
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is a renormalized superexchange coupling to
be further specified below. The Lagrangian multiplier FORMULA  is
introduced to implement the condition ().
In the limit where the gauge field FORMULA  can be treated as a static
field, e.g., in the holon condensed regime, Eq. (REF ) can be
straightforwardly diagonalized by a Bogoliubov transformation{{cite:dea5ea1d-ed32-462d-8af9-34b8e74b79dd}}
FORMULA 
as FORMULA , where FORMULA  FORMULA  and FORMULA  The Lagrangian multiplier FORMULA  is determined by
enforcing FORMULA . The wave function FORMULA 
and the spectrum FORMULA  are determined by the following eigen equation,
FORMULA 
Self-consistently, an another gauge-invariant mean-field order parameter
FORMULA 
in this mean-field scheme.
FIGURE 
The corresponding ground state is given by{{cite:13125b62-aabd-416f-a9c7-549995afc8e6}}
FORMULA 
where the RVB amplitude FORMULA  It can be further shown{{cite:13125b62-aabd-416f-a9c7-549995afc8e6}} that FORMULA  only if FORMULA  different sublattices, i.e., the RVB amplitude FORMULA  only connects FORMULA  and FORMULA  spins on opposite sublattices. The calculated FORMULA  is plotted in Fig. REF  for FORMULA  and FORMULA  belong to
different sublattices, which shows that while FORMULA , for FORMULA  at
half-filling, its absolute value becomes exponentially decay at finite
doping:{{cite:13125b62-aabd-416f-a9c7-549995afc8e6}}
FORMULA 
with a characteristic length scale which is to be identified as the spin
correlation length later
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the typical “cyclotron” radius decided by Eq. (REF ).
At half-filling, the ground state FORMULA 
qualitatively describes the AF correlations fairly well.{{cite:2737c8e0-5c2b-4139-986e-054e74ab16cb}} In
particular, one may define
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  denotes the projection to a single occupancy with each
lattice site occupied by one spin. FORMULA  is equivalent to
Eq. (REF ) with FORMULA  shown in Fig. REF . Based on Eq. (REF ), a numerical calculation{{cite:13125b62-aabd-416f-a9c7-549995afc8e6}} gives rise to FORMULA  and a
staggered magnetization FORMULA  with the maximum sample size FORMULA . These results are essentially the same as the best variational result{{cite:76fb2caa-ec38-4edb-ac6d-5ce51d2da34f}} and also compare extremely well with exact numerical results of FORMULA 
and FORMULA .

Ground-state wave function
At finite doping, it is easy to see that a simple ansatz for the full ground
state: FORMULA  does not work here because Eq. (REF ) would lead
to vanishing FORMULA .
According to FORMULA  in Eq. (REF ), the hopping of a holon should be
always accompanied by a spinon “backflow” or vice versa. But this is not properly “registered” in utilizing Eq. (REF ). It implies that
the correct way to add holes in the ground state should be{{cite:13125b62-aabd-416f-a9c7-549995afc8e6}} FORMULA  or more precisely
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  describes the bosonic holon wave function, while the
“spinon backflow” operator is given by
FORMULA 
where the summation over the spin index FORMULA  is under the
constraint FORMULA  (note that FORMULA  in FORMULA . Here FORMULA  is understood as describing the
“half-filling” spin background even at
finite doping. Obviously the no double occupancy constraint is automatically
satisfied by FORMULA  defined in Eq. (REF ) at arbitrary
doping.
Then, in accordance with the gauge invariance under (REF ) and (REF ), in minimizing FORMULA , FORMULA  will be determined as the ground state of the effective
hopping Hamiltonian FORMULA  in Eq. (REF ), while the renormalized
hopping integral FORMULA  is given by
FORMULA 
In the dilute hole limit where the correlations between the
“backflow spinons” are negligible, FORMULA  may be
reduced to a product of the single-spinon wave function FORMULA 
which can be variationally determined by optimizing FORMULA  as the maximal
eigen value of the following eigen equation{{cite:13125b62-aabd-416f-a9c7-549995afc8e6}}
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  FORMULA 
Numerically FORMULA  thus determined is weakly doping dependent with FORMULA .{{cite:13125b62-aabd-416f-a9c7-549995afc8e6}}
Self-consistently let us go back to check the superexchange energy since FORMULA  is now modified by FORMULA  for the
spin degrees of freedom:
FORMULA 
Note that FORMULA . And FORMULA 
with FORMULA  (FORMULA ), such that
FORMULA 
at small doping. Here FORMULA  has been empirically determined{{cite:f048ab0b-ac29-4044-9ed4-38a1c6c0d538}} by FORMULA 
by comparing with the experimental measurements. The mean-field treatment of
the last line in Eq. (REF ) leads to the effective spinon Hamiltonian ().
Generally speaking, in order to minimize FORMULA  the “backflow spinons” in FORMULA  are better paired up{{cite:13125b62-aabd-416f-a9c7-549995afc8e6}}
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  FORMULA , where FORMULA  denotes the pairing
amplitude between the two “backflow
spinons”, which is no longer restricted to the pairing
between two opposite sublattices. The paring FORMULA  is expected
to reduce the hopping integral FORMULA  and enhance FORMULA  but
the detailed values of them will not affect the general properties of the
phase string model discussed below.

PHYSICAL CONSEQUENCES
The minimal phase string model is composed of Eqs. (REF ) and (). In the following we shall see that such a simple model will possess a
rich phase diagram unifying the AF state, the SC phase, the pseudogap regime
including both the upper and lower pseudogap phases, as well as a
high-temperature “normal state”. The
richness of this model can be attributed to the unconventional competition
between the charge and spin degrees of freedom via the mutual Chern-Simons
gauge structure.
Superconducting (SC) phase
The SC state is a simple self-consistent solution of the phase string model
at finite doping.{{cite:dea5ea1d-ed32-462d-8af9-34b8e74b79dd}} First, the bosonic holons will experience a
Bose condensation at FORMULA  if FORMULA  in FORMULA . Once the
holons are condensed, the gauge field FORMULA  will reduce to a
non-dynamic FORMULA  to describe a uniform flux of strength
FORMULA 
per plaquette. Then, according to FORMULA , a gap will open up in the spinon
spectrum, such that the fluctuations of FORMULA  get gapped, which in
return self-consistently ensures the holon condensation in FORMULA .
With the holon condensation FORMULA , the amplitude of the SC order parameter, Eq. (REF ), becomes finite:
FORMULA 
and in the ground state, the phase coherence
FORMULA 
can be realized because of a finite-range RVB pairing of spinons with a
finite excitation energy gap (cf. Sec. 4.1.6.). Then the
superconducting order parameter defined in Eq. (REF ) gains a finite
mean value
FORMULA 
Note that the phase factor FORMULA  will also decide the d-wave symmetry of FORMULA  (FORMULA  is s-wave-like in general).{{cite:772c861f-123a-4db0-8044-7574c256eb75}}
Ground-state wave function
The holon condensation as the solution of Eq. (REF ) at FORMULA  may be
approximately treated as an ideal one with
FORMULA 
Then the corresponding ground state of Eqs. (REF ) and (REF ) is
simplified to{{cite:13125b62-aabd-416f-a9c7-549995afc8e6}}
FORMULA 
in which FORMULA  denotes a projection onto a FORMULA -hole state and
FORMULA 
Equation (REF ) implies FORMULA 
Then, in terms of Eqs. (REF ) and (REF ){{cite:13125b62-aabd-416f-a9c7-549995afc8e6}}
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is
a s-wave constant{{cite:13125b62-aabd-416f-a9c7-549995afc8e6}} based on Eq. (REF ). Thus, it confirms
again that the SC off-diagonal-long-range-order (ODLRO) [Eq. (REF )] is
established once the phase coherence (REF ) is realized in the ground
state.

Generalized Ginzburg-Landau (GL) equation
In the SC state, one may treat the charge condensate in terms of a slowly
varying continuous field, FORMULA . Note that in the continuum limit Eq. (REF ) can
be rewritten as
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  FORMULA  and FORMULA  is the continuum
version of FORMULA  given by
FORMULA 
with FORMULA .
By noting that the holons here are hard-core bosons with a repulsive
short-range interaction, one may generally write down the corresponding GL
free energy FORMULA  FORMULA  where{{cite:1f37420f-3bf2-480a-b789-e018dd1126bf}}
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  denoting the “normal
state” free energy density.  And the “supercurrent” density is given by
FORMULA 
These equations are similar to an ordinary GL theory describing a charge FORMULA 
Bose condensate coupled to an external electromagnetic field FORMULA , except that FORMULA  is further coupled to the spin degrees of
freedom through the vector potential FORMULA . It means that each
isolated spin (spinon) will register as a FORMULA  flux tube in Eq. (REF ) to exert frustration effect on the charge condensate. Thus, such a
generalized GL must be coupled to the spinon Hamiltonian FORMULA  to
govern the basic physics in the SC state.
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 

Non-BCS-type elementary excitation: FORMULA  spin excitation
As outlined in Sec. 3.3, the spinon Hamiltonian FORMULA  can be diagonalized
under the condition (REF ). Figure REF  shows the
dispersive behavior of the FORMULA  spin excitation based on the peak position
of the spin dynamic susceptibility FORMULA  at different doping concentrations, which clearly depicts how the spin
excitation evolves from the spin-wave picture at half-filling (dotted curve)
to the non-propagating modes (solid bars) in the SC state.{{cite:8773ecd2-f36d-4cf2-9bc4-c0b1e9ea7215}}
A clear spin gap is opened up at FORMULA  in the SC state with the gapless
spin wave replaced by a resonancelike mode (Fig. REF ) around the AF
wave vector FORMULA  whose doping dependence
is also shown in the inset of the left panel in Fig. REF . Such a
resonance mode has a finite width in momentum which implies a finite spin
correlation length FORMULA  [Eq. (REF )] as shown in Fig. REF .
Furthermore, the spatial charge inhomogeneity can affect the width of the
resonance peak via FORMULA  as shown{{cite:8773ecd2-f36d-4cf2-9bc4-c0b1e9ea7215}} in the right panel of Fig. REF , in which the inset illustrate the local spin susceptibility FORMULA 
FORMULA . Finally it is noted that the
envelop of the high energy FORMULA  excitation still roughly tracks the spin
wave with a softened upper bound energy FORMULA , which
decreases monotonically with doping [Fig. REF ].

Non-BCS-type topological excitation: Spinon vortex
In the above we have examined the FORMULA  spin excitation which is composed of
a pair of FORMULA  spinons according to Eq. (REF ). However, a single FORMULA  spinon excitation will be “confined” in the SC state, i.e., will not appear in
the finite energy spectrum. In this sense, the above FORMULA  excitations are
true elementary ones, which do not fractionalize. We shall elaborate this as
follows.
It is convenient to rewrite the nn SC order parameter as the mean value of (REF ) in the continuum version (without considering the d-wave symmetry
of the relative coordinate for simplicity):{{cite:1f37420f-3bf2-480a-b789-e018dd1126bf}}
FORMULA 
where the amplitude
FORMULA 
and the phase
FORMULA 
FIGURE 
From Eq. (REF ), it is clear that FORMULA  describes FORMULA  phase
vortices whose cores are centered at spinons: i.e., FORMULA  or FORMULA  each time as the coordinate FORMULA 
continuously winds around a spinon once according to Eq. (REF ). In other words, a spinon is always associated with a FORMULA  vortex in FORMULA , known as a spinon-vortex composite{{cite:1f37420f-3bf2-480a-b789-e018dd1126bf}}, {{cite:3d865821-571b-4288-bf45-ef17381cc6a3}} which is schematically illustrated in Fig. REF (a). A
spinon-vortex and -antivortex pair of a finite range of separation will
result in the cancellation of the phase FORMULA  at a large length scale
as shown in Fig. REF (b).
By writing
FORMULA 
a London equation for the supercurrent based on Eq. (REF ) is given by{{cite:1f37420f-3bf2-480a-b789-e018dd1126bf}}
FORMULA 
Since each unpaired spinon will contribute to FORMULA  in terms Eq. (REF ) if the loop FORMULA 
encloses such a spinon, a minimal supercurrent vortex centered around
it is then given by
FORMULA 
at FORMULA  according to Eq. (REF ).
For a single spinon vortex centered at the origin, we have FORMULA , for distances FORMULA , the size of the
vortex core. Using FORMULA ,
one can estimate the energy cost of a spinon-induced vortex current based on
Eq. (REF ) by{{cite:1f37420f-3bf2-480a-b789-e018dd1126bf}}
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the size of the sample. Thus one concludes that a single FORMULA 
spinon excitation is forbidden owing to a logarithmically diverging energy.{{cite:1f37420f-3bf2-480a-b789-e018dd1126bf}}

Topological defects: Flux quantization and Zn impurity
The phase string model predicts that an isolated spinon excitation is a
topological vortex which cannot live alone in the bulk of the SC state. So
there is no electron fractionalization at low energy and long distance.
However, in the presence of two kinds of special defects in the
superconductor, a single spinon excitation can be naturally induced as a
unique prediction of the model.
Flux quantization
In the presence of magnetic field, using Eq. (REF ) we get
FORMULA 
where the integral is over a closed loop FORMULA  and FORMULA , an integer. Now
suppose that the integration is carried over a loop that is far away from
the magnetic vortex core, where FORMULA . Then one arrives at
FORMULA 
If FORMULA , the magnetic flux will be quantized at FORMULA  in
units of FORMULA ; i.e., the minimal flux quantum in this case is FORMULA , as expected for a charge FORMULA  Bose system. However,
the presence of FORMULA  changes the quantization condition
radically. Suppose there is one excited spinon trapped in the core of a
magnetic fluxoid [Fig. REF (a)]. Then, from Eq. (REF ), we obtain
the minimal flux quantization condition{{cite:1f37420f-3bf2-480a-b789-e018dd1126bf}}
FORMULA 
which is precisely the quantization condition at FORMULA . As the holons do not distinguish between internal
(fictitious) and external (magnetic) flux in (REF ), they still perceive
a total flux quantized at FORMULA  [see Fig. REF (a)], even though
the true magnetic flux quantum is FORMULA .
FIGURE 
Therefore, an excited spinon or free FORMULA  moment will be
“nucleated” inside the core of a magnetic
vortex, which plays a crucial role to ensure the flux quantization at FORMULA .{{cite:1f37420f-3bf2-480a-b789-e018dd1126bf}} But normally the Kondo screening effect due to the
coupling to the background quasiparticles may complicate the analysis of
possible experimental behavior of such a free moment at very low
temperatures.

Zn impurity
In the FORMULA -FORMULA  model, a zinc impurity is treated as an empty site
with excluding the occupation of any electrons. If one reformulates the
model, with the defect, in the phase string representation outlined in Secs.
2 and 3, it is found{{cite:0f839592-22b3-4a92-ba88-77b1847b6e1e}} that such a “vacancy” site will behave like a topological defect which
induces a vortex current in the resulting phase string model, as shown in
Fig. REF (a). A heuristic understanding is to imagine exciting a
spinon in the pure system at a given site and then freezing its spin such
that the superexchange coupling with the surrounding spins is effectively
cutoff. Nor a holon can hop to this site such that the effect of a zinc
impurity is effectively created, which is nothing but a vortex in Fig. REF (a).
Now it is natural to see why a zinc impurity will generally induce a spin-FORMULA  around it in the SC state: Such a Zn-vortex would cost a
logarithmically divergent energy and thus must be “screened” by nucleating a neutral FORMULA  spinon which
carries an antivortex and is bound to the latter, as shown in Fig. REF (b).
FIGURE 
Once the topological origin of the FORMULA  moment around a zinc impurity is
established, a simple effective description of the system with one zinc
impurity can be developed{{cite:0f839592-22b3-4a92-ba88-77b1847b6e1e}} based on a “sudden
approximation” using the phase string model. The physical
consequences, as clearly illustrated in Figs. REF , REF , and REF , are that the FORMULA  free moment induced by the zinc
impurity distributes in an AF staggered pattern around the “vacancy” site.
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 

Superconducting transition
We have seen that a single excited spinon is a topological vortex. The
interaction between spinon-vortices can be obtained by substituting Eq. (REF ) into Eq. (REF ) and carrying out the area integration{{cite:3d865821-571b-4288-bf45-ef17381cc6a3}}
FORMULA 
in which FORMULA  refer to the signs of vorticities carried by
spinons and
FORMULA 
with FORMULA . Eq. (REF ) is similar to the XY model, except that FORMULA  introduces FORMULA  instead FORMULA  vortices and the vortex
cores are attached to spinons which have their own dynamics as governed by FORMULA  with an intrinsic quantum length scale FORMULA .
These spinon-vortex composites form vortex-antivortex bound pairs at low
temperature [cf. Fig. REF (b)]. Such a binding directly results
in a phase coherence
FORMULA 
of the SC order parameter (REF ). A detailed renormalization group
analysis leads to the following FORMULA  relation{{cite:823b692b-903e-4a7a-9519-0aa961aad723}}
FORMULA 
which connects the phase coherence temperature with the spin resonancelike
energy FORMULA  (cf. Fig. REF ).
The superconducting phase coherence (REF ) implies that spinons are
confined in the bulk where a single spinon-vortex excitation costs a
logarithmically divergent energy. In this case, a finite energy elementary
excitation is an FORMULA  spin excitation composed of pairs of spinon-vortices,
whose minimal excitation corresponds to the spin resonancelike mode with FORMULA  with FORMULA  denoting
the lowest level in the spinon spectrum in terms of FORMULA .

Emergence of the nodal quasiparticle
So far we have surveyed some novel properties of the SC state, which
generally are non-BCS like. They involve either “high
energy” (e.g., spin excitations above the spin gap FORMULA ) or short-distance (e.g., the vortex core at a length scale FORMULA ) physics. However, in a sufficiently long wavelength and low
energy regime, a typical d-wave BCS superconductor will eventually emerge,{{cite:44a3e27b-0ea0-4900-afb2-e2dab6999538}} where the physical properties will be essentially dominated by
the conventional nodal quasiparticle excitations.
A quasiparticle excitation is created by the electron FORMULA -operator.{{cite:44a3e27b-0ea0-4900-afb2-e2dab6999538}} According to the definition (REF ), it is composed of a pair
of holon and spinon together with a phase vortex factor FORMULA 
as a “bound state”. Such a low-lying
excitation is a “collective mode”,{{cite:44a3e27b-0ea0-4900-afb2-e2dab6999538}} which will be independent of the “mean-field” phase string model FORMULA  below
the spinon gap FORMULA . Besides the spinon gap in FORMULA , the
gapless “phonon mode” for the condensed
holons in FORMULA  will be turned into the plasma mode by coupling to the
external electromagnetic field — the Anderson-Higgs mechanism. So a
low-lying quasiparticle should remain coherent since there are neither other
low-lying states for it to decay into nor to scatter with.
To further see how a quasiparticle is compatible with FORMULA ,
one may examine the behavior of its three components. It has been seen that
an isolated spinon excitation will cost a logarithmically divergent energy
via the gauge field FORMULA . Similarly a single localized holon excited
from the condensate will also create a divergent energy due to the global
spinon response via the gauge field FORMULA  in FORMULA .{{cite:772c861f-123a-4db0-8044-7574c256eb75}}
Furthermore, a divergent energy is also associated with the creation of
vortices by FORMULA .{{cite:772c861f-123a-4db0-8044-7574c256eb75}} However, as the bound state of
these three fields, a quasiparticle excitation will no longer invite any
nonlocal response from FORMULA  neither from the holons nor the
spinons.{{cite:44a3e27b-0ea0-4900-afb2-e2dab6999538}}, {{cite:772c861f-123a-4db0-8044-7574c256eb75}} In other words, the holon and spinon are confined
inside a quasiparticle, making it a stable “local” excitation with a finite excitation energy.
The confining potential is logarithmic.
The existence of the low-lying quasiparticle excitation may be also
understood based on the ground state (REF ),{{cite:13125b62-aabd-416f-a9c7-549995afc8e6}} which can be
considered as the Bose condensation of the bosonic field FORMULA  on the
RVB background FORMULA  with FORMULA . Then a low-lying excitation may be constructed based
on FORMULA , with some smooth change
in the FORMULA . Generally with achieving the phase coherence (REF ),
one has
FORMULA 
with
FORMULA 
according to the discussion in Sec. 4.1.1. Therefore, such type of low-lying
excitations, constructed with a smooth change in FORMULA , can
always be described in terms of a pair of fermionic electronic
(quasiparticle) excitations. In particular, due to the d-wave nature of FORMULA , the separation of the quasiparticles along the nodal line
may be infinitely large. As “collective
modes”, the quasiparticles are not directly described by FORMULA , consistent with the fact that FORMULA 
determines FORMULA  and FORMULA  in Eq. (REF ),
but not the spinon backflow wave function FORMULA  in FORMULA .
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
The effective Hamiltonian governing the motion of a quasiparticle excitation
can be derived based on the original FORMULA -FORMULA  model.{{cite:44a3e27b-0ea0-4900-afb2-e2dab6999538}}, {{cite:76015c2a-1674-436a-ab48-d43c6f32e98d}} The
renomalization effect from interacting with the background electrons will be
represented by the mean-field order parameter FORMULA ,
etc. An equation of motion description of such a quasiparticle has been
developed,{{cite:44a3e27b-0ea0-4900-afb2-e2dab6999538}}, {{cite:76015c2a-1674-436a-ab48-d43c6f32e98d}} which shows the low-energy part of the spectral
function is similar to a sharp d-wave BCS one, but the high-energy part (FORMULA ) is nontrivial as the composite (spin-charge separation) feature
will show up, where the quasiparticle can decay into a pair of spinon and
holon locally without costing much from the logarithmic confining
potential. Figure REF  illustrates the d-wave nodal quasiparticle
dispersion schematically, where the quasiparticle spectral function has a
sharp lineshape at
FORMULA 
Namely, the spinon gap FORMULA  (or spin gap FORMULA  will provide a
protection for the coherent quasiparticles in the SC state. Indeed, in the
half-filling limit, FORMULA  and the single-electron spectral
function has only an incoherent “composite” part{{cite:117ad3b8-4c09-43cb-8871-12832247466e}} as shown in Fig. REF .
The more detailed results for the spectral function in the SC state will be
presented in a forthcoming paper.{{cite:76015c2a-1674-436a-ab48-d43c6f32e98d}}

Lower Pseudogap Phase (LPP) [Spontaneous Vortex Phase (SVP)]
Due to the composite structure of the SC order parameter FORMULA  [Eq. (REF )], a regime may exist at FORMULA  where FORMULA  but the Cooper pair
amplitude FORMULA  remains finite. Such a regime is known as the
spontaneous vortex phase (SVP) or the lower pseudogap phase (LPP) of the
phase string model.{{cite:3d865821-571b-4288-bf45-ef17381cc6a3}}, {{cite:545d4660-928b-4eb9-be59-bbe03521fe00}}
The LPP is described by free spinon vortices, which are thermally
excited and proliferate such that the phase FORMULA  gets disordered.
Namely, the LPP is an electron “fractionalized” state with the proliferation of unbinding
spinons, and the main distinction between the SC phase and LPP lies in the
phase (de)coherence or spinon (de)confinement.
In the LPP, a finite FORMULA  ensures that the spinon vortices are
still well defined. In fact, FORMULA  means that the generalized GL
equations [Sec. 4.1.2.] are also applicable in the LPP. Since the holon
condensation persists in the LPP, the spin dynamics at FORMULA  should also
remain qualitatively similar to the SC phase [Sec. 4.1.3.].
Phase diagram for the LPP
FIGURE 
FORMULA  is composed of the RVB pairing FORMULA  and holon
condensate FORMULA , which disappear at some FORMULA  and FORMULA ,
respectively. We will see generally FORMULA , as FORMULA  is
always underpinned by the spin singlet pairing. Thus FORMULA  will represent
the characteristic temperature for the LPP, whereas FORMULA  defines the
boundary of the so-called upper pseudogap phase (UPP) to be discussed in the
next section.
Note that without FORMULA , the holon system would be a simple 2D
hard-core boson problem according to Eq. (REF ) or (REF ), with
the Kosterlitz-Thouless (KT) transition temperature for the holon
condensation given by FORMULA  as shown in Fig. REF  by a dotted line (with FORMULA ).
However, the frustration effect of FORMULA  on the holon
condensation will play a crucial role here. The spinon-vortex density is
determined by FORMULA . Due to the opening up of a spin gap FORMULA  in the holon condensation phase, FORMULA  is exponentially small for FORMULA . With increasing temperature, FORMULA  will monotonically
increase until reaching the maximal number FORMULA 
at FORMULA  where all the RVB pairs break up.
FIGURE 
Since each free spinon carries a FORMULA  fluxoid as perceived by the holons,
the quantum phase coherence among bosonic holons will be violently
interrupted if on average there is an excited (unpaired) spinon sitting
between two neighboring holons (as illustrated by Fig. REF ),
where an exchange between a pair of holons can gain a minus sign in the wave
function. In other words, the holon condensation must break down when the
vortex density FORMULA  is comparable to holon density FORMULA , far less
than FORMULA  at low doping. Such a consideration provides an
estimate of the upper bound for FORMULA  as{{cite:545d4660-928b-4eb9-be59-bbe03521fe00}}
FORMULA 
Equation (REF ) can be also understood based on the “core touching” picture of spontaneously excited spinon
vortices. Note that the average distance between excited spinons may be
defined by FORMULA  Since the characteristic core
size of a spinon vortex is FORMULA , then one expects that the
“supercurrents” carried by
spinon-vortices are totally destroyed when the sample is fully packed by the
“cores” with FORMULA  which also
results in Eq. (REF ).
FIGURE 
The numerical result of the characteristic temperature FORMULA  in terms of
Eq. (REF ) is plotted in the left panel of Fig. REF  by the
filled circles. It shows that FORMULA  is nested below FORMULA  at
low doping and is dramatically reduced from FORMULA  with the
further increasing of doping due to the frustrations induced by spinon
excitations, which at larger doping remains nested below FORMULA  of the UPP
and eventually vanishes at FORMULA  together with FORMULA  (see the
next section).
An external magnetic field will break up more RVB pairs through the
Zeeman effect (REF ) at a given temperature. By considering the
Zeeman effect on the energy spectrum, FORMULA , the magnetic field dependence of FORMULA  can be
further obtained from Eq. (REF ) (note that we do not distinguish the
magnetic field FORMULA  and induction FORMULA  as the magnetization is usually very
weak here). Or conversely, for each FORMULA  there is a characteristic
field FORMULA  at which the LPP phase is destroyed [Fig. REF ]. FORMULA (FORMULA  determined this way is shown in the left panel
of Fig. REF  by the filled squares.
For comparison, the SC temperature FORMULA  [Eq. (REF )] is shown as the
dashed curve in the left panel of Fig. REF . Furthermore, in the
mixed state below FORMULA , by including the Zeeman energy, FORMULA  is
reduced to FORMULA  such that one can
estimate FORMULA  by using a simple relation FORMULA  Then in turn one may define FORMULA  which is shown in Fig. REF  by a dashed curve. Note that FORMULA  so defined will vanish at FORMULA  resembling the
conventional FORMULA  in a BCS superconductor. However, since free spinon
vortices are generally present at FORMULA  FORMULA , FORMULA  is
a crossover field which no longer has the same meaning as FORMULA  in a
conventional BCS superconductor. Roughly speaking, the Abrikosov magnetic
vortices are expected to be present below FORMULA  where the
spontaneous spinon-vortices, generated by the Zeeman effect, are still
loosely paired, whereas the vortex unbinding occurs above FORMULA .
So FORMULA  defines a crossover between two types of vortex regime.
The numerical result shows that FORMULA , which results in FORMULA  FORMULA  according to Eq. (REF ).

Nernst effect
Base on the London-like equation (REF ), using the steady current
condition
FORMULA 
and the electric field FORMULA  in the
transverse gauge, one finds{{cite:3d865821-571b-4288-bf45-ef17381cc6a3}}
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  denotes the density of spinon vortices and antivortices
with drifting velocity FORMULA  along a direction perpendicular
to the electric field. As illustrated by Fig. REF (a), the
electric field and the drifting of vortices and antivortices must be
balanced according to Eq. (REF ) in order to avoid the system being
accelerated indefinitely with FORMULA . So the
applied electric field will drive the vortices and antivortices moving along
a perpendicular direction with opposite velocities: FORMULA  if the vortices and antivortices are not polarized by the external
magnetic field, i.e., FORMULA  FORMULA  FORMULA .
FIGURE 
The Nernst signal FORMULA  is the electric field measured along the FORMULA -direction when spinon vortices and antivortices are both driven by a
temperature gradient in the same direction along the FORMULA -direction:
FORMULA 
Such a case is shown in Fig. REF (b), where the
spinon-vortices and -antivortices move along the FORMULA -direction
with FORMULA . To have a finite FORMULA  in terms of Eq. (REF ), then the vortex density FORMULA  has to
be polarized by the external magnetic field FORMULA  according to the “neutrality” condition FORMULA  such that
FORMULA 
Suppose FORMULA  is the transport entropy carried by a spinon
vortex and FORMULA  is its viscosity such that the drift velocity FORMULA  can be decided by FORMULA 
Then one has FORMULA . On the other hand, in the
absence of the temperature gradient, a charge current can also drive a
transverse motion of spinon vortices and antivortices along opposite
directions, i.e., FORMULA  such that an electric
field is generated along the current direction according to Eq. (REF ),
leading to a finite resistivity due to the presence of free vortices, which
is given by
FORMULA 
with FORMULA . This formula is familiar in the
vortex flow regime of a conventional superconductor. Then, by eliminating FORMULA , one obtains{{cite:545d4660-928b-4eb9-be59-bbe03521fe00}}
FORMULA 
FIGURE 
What really makes the Nernst transport unique in the present theory is that
the transport entropy FORMULA  here is associated with the spin degree of
freedom due to its free FORMULA  moment, instead of a normal core in a
conventional BCS superconductor, which is given by FORMULA  The temperature and magnetic field dependence of FORMULA 
is shown in Fig. REF .{{cite:545d4660-928b-4eb9-be59-bbe03521fe00}} The magnitude of such a quantity
is comparable to the experimental data, implying that the transport entropy
due to the free moment in a spinon-vortex is capable to produce the Nernst
signal observed experimentally.{{cite:51fe2de0-49bb-4056-867a-fb4d52650958}}

Spin Hall effect
A unique prediction related to the spinon-vortex motion driven by an
external electric field is the existence of a conserved dissipationless spin
Hall current.{{cite:0d864396-bee8-45de-929d-1c55e1cfc867}} As shown in Fig. REF (a),
vortices can be driven by an in-plane electric field to move along the
transverse direction. Since each vortex carries a free moment, if these
moments are partially polarized, say, by an external magnetic field via the
Zeeman effect, then a spin Hall current can be generated along the vortex
motion direction. The spin Hall conductivity is determined as follows:{{cite:7b806658-4f54-4b5f-86bc-cf84c6e37308}}
FORMULA 
which only depends on the intrinsic properties of the system like the
uniform spin susceptibility FORMULA  with the electron FORMULA -factor FORMULA . It is important to note that the external magnetic field FORMULA 
applied perpendicular to the 2D plane reduces the spin rotational symmetry
of the system to the conservation of the FORMULA  component only, satisfying FORMULA  Thus the
polarized spin current FORMULA  is still conserved and remains
dissipationless as the current of its carriers – vortices is dissipationless in the LPP. In contrast, the charge current remains
dissipative as FORMULA .

Magnetization
Inspired by the experiment,{{cite:51fe2de0-49bb-4056-867a-fb4d52650958}} the diamagnetism has been also
studied. The total magnetization can be expressed as{{cite:641b3acd-665b-4241-aa5b-6fb91e209ab2}}
FORMULA 
in which FORMULA  and FORMULA  stand for the orbital
diamagnetism from the vortices and the paramagnetism from the Zeeman
coupling, respectively. Based on the mutual Chern-Simons formulation of the
phase string model outlined in Sec. 3.2, with a systematic description of
multi-spinon excitations and interaction between them, the nonlinear effect
of the magnetization vs. magnetic field can be effectively treated.{{cite:641b3acd-665b-4241-aa5b-6fb91e209ab2}}
The magnetic field and temperature dependence of the total magnetization at
different doping concentrations as well as the diamagnetism part FORMULA  at FORMULA  are shown in Fig. REF  based on a
mean-field approximation in the mutual Chern-Simons description.{{cite:641b3acd-665b-4241-aa5b-6fb91e209ab2}}
Note that FORMULA  with FORMULA  as the uniform
spin susceptibility to be discussed later in the weak field limit.
FIGURE 

Magneto-resistance
Due to the deconfinement of spinons, the quasiparticles are no longer the
stable low-lying excitations in the LPP. The origin of the dissipation comes
mainly from the flow of the spinon vortices. In fact, the resistivity (REF ) is similar to the flux-flow resistivity in a Type II superconductor
except that FORMULA  in general is not simply proportional to the external
magnetic field FORMULA . Namely, the spinon vortices can be spontaneously
(thermally) generated with FORMULA  such that FORMULA  even at FORMULA . The resistivity FORMULA  can be then expanded as{{cite:641b3acd-665b-4241-aa5b-6fb91e209ab2}}
FIGURE 
FORMULA 
where the odd power terms of FORMULA  vanish due to the symmetry FORMULA . Suppose that the dependence of the viscosity FORMULA  on FORMULA  is
negligible, then the quadratic coefficient FORMULA  can be expressed as
FORMULA 
The coefficient FORMULA  and FORMULA , with the
external magnetic field FORMULA  perpendicular and parallel to the 2D plane,
respectively, can be calculated numerically as shown in Fig. REF .{{cite:641b3acd-665b-4241-aa5b-6fb91e209ab2}} An important prediction of the present theory, as shown by Fig. REF , is that FORMULA  is comparable to FORMULA . This is a rather unusual case for a vortex-flow-induced resistivity, since
normally the in-plane vortices are always created by the perpendicular
magnetic field in a Type II superconductor, where the vortex-flow-induced
resistivity only exhibits field-dependent magneto-resistivity for the
component of FORMULA  which is perpendicular to the plane. But in the present
theory, vortices are tied to the free spinons. Since the latter can be
created by the Zeeman term with the external magnetic field pointing at
any directions, the former can thus be created by the in-plane field
as well. The present mean-field-type treatment of FORMULA  may not be
expected to be quantitatively accurate in view of possible corrections from
the fluctuations, but the existence of an anomalous transverse
magneto-resistivity with FORMULA  comparable to FORMULA 
remains a very peculiar prediction.{{cite:641b3acd-665b-4241-aa5b-6fb91e209ab2}}

Upper Pseudogap Phase (UPP)
At FORMULA , the bosonic holons will be in a non-degenerate regime where
the quantum coherence is destroyed by the excited spinons via FORMULA . By contrast, the bosonic spinons can still maintain their quantum
coherence up to FORMULA  where the spin singlet pairing order parameter FORMULA  eventually vanishes. The UPP as characterized by FORMULA  is defined at FORMULA , whose key features will be
described in the following.
Phase diagram for the UPP
Based on the self-consistent solution of FORMULA , the characteristic
temperature FORMULA  at which FORMULA  is given by{{cite:f048ab0b-ac29-4044-9ed4-38a1c6c0d538}}
FORMULA 
Figure REF  shows FORMULA  (solid curve) as a function of doping with FORMULA  K. The experimental data determined by the uniform spin
susceptibility measurement in FORMULA  {{cite:c1d8c458-f3a8-432d-b9b1-bf8751f40ec0}}, {{cite:4ef21dac-9159-4455-9162-4466815db73e}} (see the
discussion in the next section) are shown by the full squares. Furthermore,
the open circles are independently determined from the c-axis transport {{cite:649f08e7-b31c-4a9c-818a-84ea0e919a6c}} in the overdoped regime.
FIGURE 
Note that here FORMULA  vanishes at FORMULA  FORMULA  and the curve FORMULA  versus FORMULA  in Fig. REF  is not sensitive to the choice
of FORMULA  Based on the above experimental data{{cite:c1d8c458-f3a8-432d-b9b1-bf8751f40ec0}}, {{cite:4ef21dac-9159-4455-9162-4466815db73e}}, {{cite:649f08e7-b31c-4a9c-818a-84ea0e919a6c}} FORMULA  is fixed at FORMULA  such that FORMULA .
Due to the bosonic RVB origin of the UPP, the Zeeman effect of an external
magnetic field can effectively destroy the singlet pairing of spins in the
strong field limit, which is the only direct field effect on the RVB
background.
With incorporating the Zeeman term (REF ), one can obtain the
zero-temperature “critical” field FORMULA  at which FORMULA  vanishes:
FORMULA 
In Fig. REF , FORMULA  is plotted as the dashed
curve which scales with the zero-field FORMULA  fairly well, which means FORMULA . The temperature dependence of
the “critical” field FORMULA 
is shown in the inset of Fig. REF  at FORMULA  together with the
experimental data obtained from the c-axis magneto transport measurements.{{cite:649f08e7-b31c-4a9c-818a-84ea0e919a6c}} We see that the high-temperature experimental data
(open circles) fit the theoretical curve very well without any additional
adjustable parameter. Furthermore the zero-field FORMULA  determined by the
same experiments is also in good agreement with the theory as shown
(open circles) in the main panel of Fig. REF . But one may notice that
the experimental FORMULA  starts to deviate from the theoretical
curve in the inset (full squares) as the temperature is further lowered and
saturated to approximately the half of the predicted number (which implies FORMULA . However, such a deviation
occurs only for those data (full squares) which have been obtained by extrapolation in the experimental measurement {{cite:649f08e7-b31c-4a9c-818a-84ea0e919a6c}} and therefore
may not be as reliable as the higher temperature ones (open squares) in the
inset of Fig. REF .
Finally, the three-dimensional phase diagram of the UPP, together with the
LPP and SC phase, in the parameter of magnetic field, doping concentration,
and the temperature is summarized in the right panel of Fig. REF . FORMULA  vs. FORMULA  at FORMULA  is also plotted in Fig. REF  FORMULA

Uniform spin susceptibility
The spin singlet pairing (RVB) nature of the UPP is clearly manifested in
the uniform spin susceptibility FORMULA  given in the main panel of Fig. REF (a) at different doping concentrations.{{cite:0f839592-22b3-4a92-ba88-77b1847b6e1e}} Note that FORMULA  reaches a maximum value FORMULA  at temperature FORMULA  where
the RVB order parameter FORMULA  vanishes. At FORMULA , FORMULA 
follows a Curie-FORMULA  behavior as spins become free moments at the
mean-field level. The curves in Fig. REF (a) are presented as FORMULA  versus FORMULA , which approximately collapse onto
a single curve independent of doping. The comparison with experiment has
been discussed in Ref. {{cite:f048ab0b-ac29-4044-9ed4-38a1c6c0d538}}.
FIGURE 
In Fig. REF (b), the calculated FORMULA  versus FORMULA  at FORMULA 
is shown together with the high temperature series expansion (HTSE) result{{cite:a29ec2b1-f5db-4a68-9f52-b454ea088e8a}}. It is noted that the experimental scaling curve actually
coincides with the half-filling HTSE very well.{{cite:c1d8c458-f3a8-432d-b9b1-bf8751f40ec0}}, {{cite:4ef21dac-9159-4455-9162-4466815db73e}} Thus one
can clearly see the overall qualitative agreement between the bosonic RVB
theory and the experiment from Figs. REF (a) and (b). Note that the
mean-field FORMULA  deviates from the HTSE result prominently around FORMULA  where the latter is a much smoother function of FORMULA  It reflects the
fact that FORMULA  is only a crossover temperature and the vanishing FORMULA  does not represent a true phase transition. Obviously, the amplitude
fluctuations beyond the mean-field FORMULA  have to be considered in
order to better describe FORMULA  in this regime. FORMULA  determined in
the mean-field theory is quite close to the HTSE result, indicating the
crossover temperature itself can still be reasonably decided by the
mean-field bosonic RVB description given above.

Spin-lattice relaxation and spin-echo decay rates
The NMR spin-lattice relaxation rate of nuclear spins is determined by{{cite:f048ab0b-ac29-4044-9ed4-38a1c6c0d538}}
FORMULA 
where the form factor FORMULA  comes from the hyperfine coupling
between nuclear spin and spin fluctuations. Due to the fact that the FORMULA  for planar FORMULA  nuclear spins vanishes at
the AF wave vector FORMULA , while for planar FORMULA  nuclear spins is peaked at FORMULA , a
combined measurement of FORMULA  and FORMULA  will thus provide
important information about the AF correlations at low frequency FORMULA .
FIGURE 
Based on the mean-field equation,{{cite:f048ab0b-ac29-4044-9ed4-38a1c6c0d538}} the calculated spin-lattice
relaxation rates, FORMULA  and FORMULA  for the planar copper
and oxygen nuclear spins are presented in the left panel of Fig. REF .
It shows that the ratio FORMULA , which is a constant above FORMULA , starts to increase with reducing temperature below FORMULA . At lower
temperature, FORMULA , such a ratio arises sharply. For example, FORMULA  diverges at FORMULA  as a true AFLRO exists at FORMULA  And it can still reach about 100 in the low temperature limit at FORMULA , all qualitatively consistent with the experimental
observations. As pointed out above, such behavior clearly demonstrates that
strong low-lying AF correlations around FORMULA  develop
in the UPP, leading to the simultaneous enhancement of FORMULA  and
the cancellation in FORMULA . In the inset of the left panel in Fig. REF , FORMULA  has been plotted, which is also qualitatively
consistent with the experiment, but deviates from the conventional Korringa
behavior FORMULA  for a Fermi liquid system. By
contrast, the ratio FORMULA  in an f-RVB mean-field state
(the FORMULA  flux phase) at half-filling remains flat over the whole
temperature region as shown by the dashed line in Fig. REF ,
indicating the absence of any significant AF correlations around FORMULA  in the pseudogap regime of the fermionic RVB state.
FIGURE 
The spin-echo decay rate FORMULA , which is related to the static AF
correlations via the real part of spin susceptibility function, is also
examined in the right panel of Fig. REF . It shows that FORMULA 
begins to increase with reducing temperature below FORMULA . Such behavior
has been also observed in the experiment, which once again clearly supports
the picture that the strong AF correlations start to develop in the UPP.
By comparison, the corresponding magnetic properties in the LPP are
presented Fig. REF . In the main panel, the uniform spin susceptibility
shows a true “spin gap” behavior, in
contrast to the “scaling” curve shown in
the UPP in Fig. REF  where FORMULA  in the doped regime roughly
behaves like that at half-filling—in the latter case FORMULA  saturates
to a constant at FORMULA . In the LPP, these FORMULA 's can drop below that
at FORMULA  and vanish at FORMULA . Furthermore, FORMULA  also
decreases with temperature (see the left inset of Fig. REF ), as opposed
to the behavior in the UPP, indicating the appearance of the spin gap over
whole momenta. On the other hand, although the low-energy spin fluctuations
are gapped, the static AF spin-spin correlations as described by the real
part of spin susceptibility function still remain, as reflected by FORMULA 
shown in the right inset of Fig. REF , where the monotonic increase of FORMULA  in the UPP (Fig. REF ) is replaced by the saturation at the
LPP.

Incoherent “Normal State”:
Classical Regime
As shown above, at FORMULA , the mean-field RVB order parameter FORMULA  vanishes and to the leading order of approximation the spins are
localized at the lattice sites with very weak correlations between them. The
residual AF superexchange coupling will come from FORMULA  which has been neglected in the minimal phase
string model.
In this regime, the charge dynamics will be highly nontrivial as governed by
FORMULA . According to Eq. (REF ), an isolated spinon excitation will
behave like a FORMULA -flux tube as perceived by the holons and thus provides
a strong, unconventional charge scattering source. So at high temperature
where a lot of spinons (FORMULA ) are thermally excited, one expects
a severe intrinsic frustration effect exerted from FORMULA  on the
holons.
Novel scattering mechanism for the charge carriers
To see how the spin dynamics influences the charge degree of freedom via FORMULA , one may write down the propagator for FORMULA  [Eq. (REF )]{{cite:d8a7372b-9c6a-470a-a0af-24a1fc7566ed}}
FORMULA 
Define the local flux per plaquette (surrounding a lattice site) FORMULA  Its total strength is generally determined by
FORMULA 
where the spin structure factor FORMULA .
In particular, at FORMULA , there is no more significant AF
correlations among spins as FORMULA  and one finds FORMULA . Thus the corresponding gauge flux fluctuation becomes truly
static with the weight FORMULA  concentrating at FORMULA . At low doping, FORMULA  is comparable to the
simple picture that each excited spinon contribute to a flux of order of FORMULA , which represents the maximal frustration effect that the holons can
experience in the phase string model.{{cite:d8a7372b-9c6a-470a-a0af-24a1fc7566ed}}
FIGURE 
Figure REF  illustrates{{cite:d8a7372b-9c6a-470a-a0af-24a1fc7566ed}} how the holon density of states
(DOS) will get reshaped by FORMULA  or FORMULA . The
quenched method is used to average over the static random flux
configurations for FORMULA  on the lattice plaquetteFORMULA  It shows how the
DOS drastically reshaped by the gauge field, i.e., the suppression in
the high-energy (mid-band) DOS, as compared to the flux free case (dashed
curve). Note that the dotted curve in Fig. REF  represents the DOS for
the case of a uniform FORMULA  flux per plaquette, which looks similar to the
random flux case FORMULA 
except that the momenta remains well defined in a reduced Brillouin zone in
contrast to a strong mixing of momenta over a wide range by the scattering
effect in the latter.

Optical conductivity
FIGURE 
Figure REF  shows the real part of the calculated optical
conductivity.{{cite:d8a7372b-9c6a-470a-a0af-24a1fc7566ed}} The main feature of the spectral curves at various
temperatures FORMULA  is that there is generally a two-component
structure with a usual low-energy Drude component (FORMULA ) and
a mid-infrared resonancelike peak around the energy scale FORMULA . Furthermore, such a mid-infrared peak will actually
smoothly evolve into the FORMULA  behavior with reducing FORMULA , as clearly illustrated in the right panel of
Fig. REF  at a fixed holon concentration FORMULA  where the
mid-infrared resonancelike peak at smaller FORMULA 's becomes softened and finally behaves like a FORMULA 
tail in the regime FORMULA  with the weight shifting towards the
lower energy.
The origin of the mid-infrared resonance has been one of the most intriguing
optical properties in the underdoped cuprates. Normally a photon with the
momentum FORMULA  cannot excite a high-energy particle-hole pair
involving a large momentum transfer due to the momentum conservation law,
unless there is a scattering mechanism to strongly and widely smear the
momentum. This is difficult to realize in a conventional
electron-collective-mode coupling mechanism. The phase string model provides
an alternative scattering mechanism due to the strong correlation effect.
We have already seen that the effect of FORMULA  results in a double-peak
structure in the holon DOS (Fig. REF ). In contrast to the uniform FORMULA  flux case shown in the same figure, which also has a double-peak
structure, the high-energy inter-peak transition at FORMULA 
becomes possible in the random flux case due to the mixing between the small
and large momenta by the strong scattering via FORMULA  This is the origin
for the mid-infrared peak found in Fig. REF .
FIGURE 
Finally, as a comparison, the low-energy optical conductivity at FORMULA 
can be obtained by using the perturbative method.{{cite:d8a7372b-9c6a-470a-a0af-24a1fc7566ed}} Such an
approach is meaningful in the regime where the spin fluctuations are
substantially suppressed, which in turn results in the weak fluctuations of FORMULA  according to Eq. (REF ). As shown in Fig. REF , a prominent suppression of FORMULA  at low-FORMULA 
is present at FORMULA  with a second “mid-infrared” peak emerging around FORMULA  which sits somewhat between the two characteristic magnetic
energy scalesFORMULA  FORMULA  and FORMULA , as marked in the
figure. Note that such a new energy scale in the low-FORMULA  optical
conductivity merely reflects some weighted energy scale based on the
magnetic FORMULA . With the increase of temperature, the
“gap” at low energy in FORMULA  is quickly filled up by the thermal excitations as shown in Fig. REF . The lower “mid-infrared” peak feature remains around FORMULA  at low temperature
throughout the LPP below FORMULA  Note that FORMULA  is between FORMULA  and FORMULA  and the dashed curve at FORMULA is obtained by supposing
that FORMULA  where FORMULA  behaves differently.{{cite:f048ab0b-ac29-4044-9ed4-38a1c6c0d538}}
As compared to the solid curve at the same FORMULA , which corresponds
to the case inside the LPP, the overall difference is small except
for the vanishing the lower “mid-infrared” peak [Fig. REF ].

Density-density correlation function
The mid-infrared resonance peak of the FORMULA  optical conductivity
has been attributed to a large-FORMULA  transition between the double peaks
of the holon DOS [Fig. REF ]. In the following we discuss an
independent probe of such a peculiar DOS structure by studying the
density-density function at finite momentum FORMULA  and energy FORMULA  and compare the results with the exact numerical calculations.
FIGURE 
The imaginary part of the (retarded) density-density correlation function FORMULA  is presented in Fig. REF  (solid
curves), which evolves distinctively with different momenta. Note that FORMULA  is shown in the figure because it is
quantity roughly doping independent. For comparison, the exact
diagonalization results{{cite:10c16965-fc82-41c3-a416-03d2c35364b6}} are presented as dotted curves. It is
interesting to see that the overall FORMULA -peak feature of the calculated
density-density correlation function is in qualitative and systematic
agreement with the numerical one at different FORMULA 's without fitting
parameters (here FORMULA  is simply set at FORMULA  as the mid-infrared feature
peaks around FORMULA  in the numerical calculation). Such a consistency
between the present effective theory and the exact diagonalization provides
another strong evidence that the gauge-coupling boson model (REF )
correctly captures the high-energy charge excitations in the FORMULA -FORMULA  model
and large-FORMULA  Hubbard model.

Scattering rate
Experimentally the scattering rate is normally defined by
FORMULA 
which is determined by the measured optical conductivity. Here FORMULA 
denotes the plasma frequency, which in the present case is given by FORMULA .
FIGURE 
In the left panel of Fig. REF , FORMULA  based on the
calculated FORMULA  is plotted as a function of FORMULA  in
different temperatures at FORMULA , with FORMULA  which corresponds to the case where the high-FORMULA  optical conductivity looks more like a FORMULA  behavior (Fig. REF ). Here one finds that FORMULA  increases monotonically
with FORMULA  and is roughly linear-FORMULA  dependent over a wide FORMULA  region at FORMULA . Note that generally the FORMULA -dependence of FORMULA  at higher energies is closely correlated
with the evolution of the aforementioned mid-infrared feature, as shown in
the inset of the left panel of Fig. REF .
In particular, one sees a parallel shift of FORMULA  with
increasing temperature at low-FORMULA , which implies a linear-temperature
dependence of the dc scattering rate. The dc scattering rate FORMULA  can be determined by extrapolating FORMULA  to FORMULA . The obtained dc resistivity based on the Drude formula FORMULA  FORMULA  is shown in the right panel of Fig. REF  which
is indeed quite linear over a very wide range of temperature at FORMULA .
It is important to note that FORMULA  FORMULA  over a
very wide range of the temperature at FORMULA  where the Bose distribution
factor FORMULA  i.e., in the classical regime of the
bosons (FORMULA  is the holon energy spectrum). The corresponding
scattering rate FORMULA  for the case
shown in the main right panel of Fig. REF , whose slope is slightly FORMULA  dependent as indicated in the
inset. Indeed, as discussed above, the bosonic degenerate regime for the
holons already ends up at FORMULA , i.e., at the boundary of the
LPP/SVP (Fig. REF ). At FORMULA , totally FORMULA  randomly
distributed FORMULA -flux tubes are perceived by the FORMULA  holons and the
latter behave like classical particles. One expects this anomalous transport
be smoothly connected to the Brinkman-Rice retracing path regime{{cite:659e4814-2c5f-44ff-8726-d3c9b6699f4d}} in
the large FORMULA  limit.
The dc scattering rate FORMULA  has been
previously obtained{{cite:19c2bbca-eca7-4e5f-8e64-acf38ed1c456}} by the quantum Monte Carlo numerical method,
where the starting model is a system of interacting bosons coupled with
strong Gaussian fluctuations of the static gauge field of the strength FORMULA 
Note that FORMULA  used in the Monte Carlo simulation{{cite:19c2bbca-eca7-4e5f-8e64-acf38ed1c456}} is about
the same order of magnitude as in the above case and, in particular, it is
temperature independent in contrast to a linear-FORMULA  dependent FORMULA 
predicted in the slave-boson U(1) gauge theory{{cite:7f6ceb1b-b4ce-4533-92f7-2fa2f5a8a5c5}} which was
the original motivation for such a Monte Carlo study.

Low-Doping AF State: Beyond the Minimal Model
At half-filling, the antiferromagnetism can be well described by FORMULA .
However, even in the presence of a very dilute hole concentration, an AFLRO
would be immediately destroyed due to the opening up of a spin gap FORMULA  as predicted by the minimal phase string model, as
illustrated by the phase diagram in Fig. REF . In the following we
discuss a modified phase diagram by taking into account of a new topological
excitation in this regime.
The motion of holes will generally induce the irreparable phase string
effect (Sec. 2.2.). In the dilute limit of the hole concentration, the phase
string effect should mainly influence the hole dynamics, without drastically
affecting the spin part which is AFLRO ordered in the ground state. It turns
out that the holes can be self-localized by the phase string effect here.{{cite:117ad3b8-4c09-43cb-8871-12832247466e}}, {{cite:428394aa-7ede-45b8-a84d-434749f7702d}}, {{cite:8710d2a1-c133-4beb-a6ab-848e41d47664}} Without the condensation of the holons, then a spin
gap FORMULA  will no longer exist in this dilute doping
regime.
Mathematically, a ZFORMULA  topological excitation{{cite:35a776f4-5da0-4126-8849-54f7d34f6046}} (meron) is allowed
by the phase string model{{cite:428394aa-7ede-45b8-a84d-434749f7702d}}, {{cite:2ff6c6fc-e29b-4015-98e9-dffd3f584912}}
FORMULA 
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  with the
core position FORMULA  either inside a plaquette or on a lattice site.
Such a meron can be “nucleated” from the
AF state where the spinons are Bose condensed with FORMULA  and the holon becomes a topological vortex with a
logarithmically divergent energy.{{cite:428394aa-7ede-45b8-a84d-434749f7702d}}, {{cite:2ff6c6fc-e29b-4015-98e9-dffd3f584912}} A holon must be then
forced to be “confined” to a meron
to form a truly stable hole object, known as a hole dipole FORMULA{{cite:428394aa-7ede-45b8-a84d-434749f7702d}}, {{cite:2ff6c6fc-e29b-4015-98e9-dffd3f584912}} Two typical hole-dipoles of minimal size are sketched in Fig. REF  FORMULA
FIGURE 
It can be shown that the effective mass of the induced meron is infinity
such that the hole-dipole object is self-trapped in space.{{cite:2ff6c6fc-e29b-4015-98e9-dffd3f584912}}, {{cite:8710d2a1-c133-4beb-a6ab-848e41d47664}}
FIGURE 
In such a self-localization regime, the kinetic energy of the holes is
suppressed. Without the balance from the kinetic energy, the low-energy
physics in this regime will be determined by potential energies. The latter
will then decide various competing orders in this low-doping insulating
phase. The AFLRO should persist if a weak interlayer coupling is
considered.{{cite:428394aa-7ede-45b8-a84d-434749f7702d}} But the freedom in the directions of the hole-dipole
moment will lead to the reduction of the Néel temperature FORMULA  as
shown in Fig. REF . Based on the hole-dipole picture and the
renormalization group (RG) calculation,{{cite:428394aa-7ede-45b8-a84d-434749f7702d}} the critical doping FORMULA . Beyond FORMULA  or FORMULA  the system is in a cluster
spin glass phase with the dipole moments being quenched randomly in space.
With the further increase of doping, the sizes of hole dipoles will get
larger and larger, and eventually a deconfinement can occur at a critical
doping FORMULA  beyond which single holons will be
unbound from their anti-vortex partners and experience a Bose condensation
leading to a finite FORMULA .{{cite:428394aa-7ede-45b8-a84d-434749f7702d}}
Some interesting properties including the thermopower,
variable-range-hopping resistivity, and dielectric constant, etc., in this
self-localization regime have been also discussed.{{cite:8710d2a1-c133-4beb-a6ab-848e41d47664}} Furthermore, a
possible stripe instability has been explored. Note that in the above it is
assumed that the hole dipoles are self-trapped uniformly in space.
However, if there is no impurities or disorders, the uniform distribution of
the self-trapped hole-dipoles may not be stable against the formation of the
stripes due to the long-range dipole-dipole interaction.{{cite:2ff6c6fc-e29b-4015-98e9-dffd3f584912}}, {{cite:8c3096f3-5b7b-4f8b-896e-dfce25feac47}}
So in the low-doping regime, the minimal phase string model in Eqs. (REF ) and () can be generalized to
FORMULA 
to include a ZFORMULA  gauge field FORMULA :
FORMULA 
which is allowed by the general construction of the phase string model and
compatible with the bosonic RVB pairing FORMULA . Normally the core
energy of a ZFORMULA  vortex is too big in the superconducting phase, but a ZFORMULA  vortex excitation can become important at FORMULA  in the
AF state. Furthermore, a quasipaticle excitation discussed in Sec. 4.1.7.
may be equivalently considered as a bound state of a spinon, a holon, and a ZFORMULA  vortex. The details will be presented elsewhere.

Synthesis and Perspectives
In this brief review, I have surveyed a systematic effort in the study of a
doped antiferromagnet, which may be relevant to the mechanism of the high-FORMULA  cuprates. The core of this approach lies in the so-called phase
string effect, which has been mathematically identified based on the FORMULA -FORMULA 
model. It is by nature a frustration effect induced by the motion of
doped holes in an antiferromagnetic spin background.
Such a frustration effect on the spin degrees of freedom differs
fundamentally from an ordinary frustrated antiferromagnet in the presence of
geometrically “mismatched” spin
interactions, e.g., the next nearest neighbor superexchange coupling.
The key distinction is that the frustration in the former is dynamically
driven and mutual between the spin and charge degrees of freedom. Namely the
extent that the spins get frustrated crucially depends on the charge
behavior and vise versa. In different doping, temperature, magnetic
field, or other parameter regimes, the spin and charge parts will then
behave differently in order to minimize the total free energy. For
example, in the dilute hole limit, the superexchange energy of spins will
dominate and with maintaining longer range antiferromagnetic correlations
the kinetic energy of doped holes can get severely frustrated by the phase
string effect, resulting in their self-localization at low temperature; At
higher doping, to gain the kinetic energy of the doped holes, however, the
spin correlations can be “forced” to
become short-ranged via the phase string effect, and the spin background
becomes a spin liquid state. The superconducting phase coherence and nodal
quasiparticle excitation are protected by the spin gap of such a spin liquid
state.
The mathematical description of the phase string effect is rather simple,
which is basically represented by a sequence of signs [Eq. (REF )]
picked up by the nearest neighboring hoppings of the holes in a Heisenberg
spin background. It depends on the path of the hole hopping as well as the
polarizations of those spins exchanged with the hole during its motion. It
is thus both geometric and dynamic, which weights each motion path of the
holes. We have seen that such a phase string is irreparable in the
sense that the system cannot generate other signs to compensate it at each
path. In fact, the Heisenberg superexchange interaction respects the
Marshall signs, so a phase string as the disordered Marshall signs caused by
hopping cannot be “self-healed” through
the superexchange process.
Such an irreparable phase string effect identified as the most important
frustration effect in the doped antiferromagnet is singularly sensitive to
any perturbative treatment, since Eq. (REF ) will change sign for
a fluctuation with merely one additional or less FORMULA  spin
exchanged with the hole on a given path, no matter how long the path is.
Fortunately a unitary transformation exists in the FORMULA -FORMULA  model which can
precisely keep track of such a phase string because it essentially involves
the counting of the exchanges occurring between the holes and spins during
the their travelling. Then in the new representation after the unitary
transformation, known as the phase string formalism, the FORMULA -FORMULA  model
presumably becomes less singular and perturbatively treatable.
The FORMULA -FORMULA  model in the exact phase string formalism is a
topological gauge model, in which the phase string effect is precisely
described by a pair of mutual Chern-Simons gauge fields in two dimensions.
Without these gauge fields, the model reduces to a full bosonic one free
from any “sign problem”. In other words,
the nontrivial spin and charge dynamics will be governed by the topological
gauge fields which precisely reflect the phase string effect. Thus, the exact phase string formalism of the FORMULA -FORMULA  model provides a unique
starting point to study the doped antiferromagnet.
Based on the precise topological gauge structure and the good understanding
of the half-filling phase, an effective minimal phase string model working
for small doping can be then constructed as given by Eqs. (REF ) and (). Despite its novel looking, this is a rather simple model where
two bosonic matter fields, spinless holons and neutral spinons,
interact with each other by perceiving the opposite species as a FORMULA  flux
fluxoid, and the spinons form the RVB pairing whose amplitude is
self-consistently determined.
FIGURE 
Figure REF  summaries the global phase diagram of this minimal
model. The “normal state” at FORMULA  is
an incoherent “classical” regime for both
spinons and holons, where the spinons are weakly correlated, while the
diffusive holons are maximally scattered by the FORMULA  flux fluxoids
bound to the randomly distributed spinons, leading to a linear-temperature
scattering rate. At FORMULA , the spinons start to form the singlet RVB
pairing, and the short-range antiferromagnetic correlations become enhanced
with the reducing temperature, as clearly indicated by the NMR spin
relaxation rate and spin-echo decay rate. This regime is known as the upper
pseudogap phase, which is superexchange energy driven and continuously
evolves into the AFLRO state at half-filling and FORMULA . The holons remain
diffusive in this phase, although the scattering from the gauge field gets
reduced with decreasing temperature as more and more spinons are RVB paired
with the cancellation of their FORMULA  fluxoids. Eventually at FORMULA , the gauge flux is reduced so much that the bosonic coherence between
the holons can be finally established, which defines the lower pseudogap
phase that is obviously kinetic energy driven. In this phase, with the holon
condensation, a spin gap is opened up for the low-lying antiferromagnetic
fluctuations, with the weight being pushed up and concentrated at a
resonancelike peak at FORMULA  around FORMULA ,
and the spin correlation length gets “truncated” at a finite scale comparable to the average
hole-hole distance. A very unique feature in this regime is the presence of
a lot of spontaneous spinon vortices, composites of isolated spinons locking
with current vortices, which are responsible for the Nernst effect, residual
diamagnetism, and spin Hall effect, etc. In this peculiar phase, the Cooper
pair amplitude is finite because of the RVB pairing of the spinons and Bose
condensation of the holons. But the phase is disordered as the proliferation
of the spinon vortices. Eventually, at a lower temperature FORMULA , the
binding of vortices-antivortices or the confinement of the spinons will
finally lead to the superconducting phase coherence. It turns out that both
the kinetic energy of the holons and superexchange energy of the spinons are
generally benefited from this phase transition. The nodal quasiparticles
also become coherent in the superconducting phase as the result of the phase
coherence and spinon confinement. The non-BCS neutral FORMULA  spin excitation
is similar to the lower pseudogap phase with a reasonancelike structure at FORMULA  and the suppression of antiferromagnetic correlations below FORMULA ,
as caused by the holon condensation.
Such a top-down phase diagram demonstrates an amazing richness of the
minimal phase string model, which covers almost all the interesting regimes
of the high-FORMULA  cuprate superconductors, except for the very underdoped
regime where the superconducting phase ends as well as the overdoped regime
where the upper pseudogap terminates, which is question-marked in Fig. REF .
At half filling, with the vanishing gauge fields, the minimal model does
produce an AFLRO state with a very precise variational ground-state energy.
But once away from half-filling, the holon condensation will force the
opening up of a spin gap FORMULA  and thus the disappearance
of the AFLRO. But this is unphysical at sufficiently low doping where the
long-range antiferromagnetic correlations should remain dominant. Indeed, in
this regime a topological ZFORMULA  vortex can become a low-lying excitation
once being bound to a holon to form a localized composite object, known as a
hole dipole. In this regime the correct low-energy phase string model is
given by Eqs. (REF ) and (), and a hole dipole in Fig. REF  can be regarded as the realization of the dual holon confinement in
the antiferromagnetic phase in contrast to the spinon confinement in the
superconducting phase.
In the overdoped regime where the spinon RVB pairing disappears at FORMULA ,
the minimal phase string model should be also modified. A possibility is for
the ZFORMULA  vortex to be bound with a bosonic spinon such that two gauge
fields are effectively cancelled in Eq. (REF ), in favor of the holon
condensation as well as the kinetic energy. In this way, the bosonic spinons
will be effectively turned into fermions and a Fermi liquid state may be
recovered if the bosonic holons remain condensed in the high-doping regime.
So the phase string model may simply reduce to the slave-boson mean-field
description at FORMULA .
Finally we remark on that throughout this paper, only the nearest
neighboring hopping of the FORMULA -FORMULA  model is considered, which is related to
the origin of the singular phase string effect. However, the phase string
effect will get qualitatively modified in the presence of the next nearest
neighbor hopping process. This is an important issue which has not been
touched upon so far. Just like the phase string effect is very singular in
the original FORMULA -FORMULA  model, the next nearest neighbor hopping term will also
become singular in the phase string formalism. It is thus expected to be
important to interpret the detailed experimental measurements in the
cuprates, e.g., the asymmetry in the hole- and electron-doped
cuprates.

Acknowledgements
This work is partially supported by the NSFC grants.
