

Institute of Theoretical Astrophysics, University of Oslo, Norway
A major goal in solar physics has during the last five decades been to
find how energy flux generated in the solar convection zone is
transported and dissipated in the outer solar layers. Progress in this
field has been slow and painstaking. However, advances in computer
hardware and numerical methods, vastly increased observational
capabilities and growing physical insight seem finally to be leading
towards understanding. Here we present exploratory numerical MHD models
that span the entire solar atmosphere from the upper convection zone to
the lower corona. These models include non-grey, non-LTE radiative
transport in the photosphere and chromosphere, optically thin radiative
losses as well as magnetic field-aligned heat conduction in the
transition region and corona.
Introduction
The notion that chromospheric and coronal heating in some way follow
from excess “mechanical” energy flux as a result of convective motions
has been clear since the mid-1940's. Even so, it is only recently that
computer power and algorithmic developments have allowed one to even consider
taking on the daunting task of modeling the entire system from convection
zone to corona in a single model.
Several of these challenges were met during the last few years in
the work of Gudiksen & Nordlund ({{cite:e19a9391-fd32-42f1-8042-dc547f6efebd}}), where it was
shown that it is possible to model the photosphere to corona system.
In their model a scaled down longitudinal magnetic field taken from an
SOHO/MDI magnetogram of
an active region is used to produce a potential magnetic field in the
computational domain that covers 50FORMULA 50FORMULA 30 MmFORMULA . This
magnetic field is subjected to a parameterization of horizontal
photospheric flow based on observations and, at smaller scales, on
numerical convection simulations as a driver at the lower boundary.
In this paper we will consider a similar model, but one which simulates a smaller
region of the Sun; at a higher resolution and in which convection is included. The
smaller geometrical region implies that several coronal phenomena cannot be modeled.
On the other hand the greater resolution and the inclusion of convection (and the
associated non-grey radiative transfer) should allow the model described here to
give a somewhat more satisfactory description of the chromosphere and, perhaps, the
transition region and lower corona.
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 

Method
There are several reasons that the attempt to construct forward models
of the convection zone or photosphere to corona system has been so long
in coming. We will mention only a few:
The magnetic field
will tend to reach heights of approximately the same as the distance
between the sources of the field. Thus if one wishes to model the corona
to a height of, say, 10 Mm this requires a horizontal size close to the
double, or 20 Mm in order to form closed field regions up to the upper
boundary. On the other hand, resolving photospheric scale heights of
100 km or smaller and transition region scales of some few tens of
kilometers will require minimum grid sizes of less than 50 km,
preferably smaller. (Numerical “tricks” can perhaps ease some of
this difficulty, but will not help by much more than a factor two).
Putting these requirements together means that it is difficult to get
away with computational domains of much less than 150FORMULA  — a
non-trivial exercise even on todays systems.
The “Courant condition” for a
diffusive operator such as that describing thermal conduction scales
with the grid size FORMULA  instead of with FORMULA  for the
magneto-hydrodynamic operator. This severely limits the time step FORMULA  the code can be stably run at. One solution is to vary the magnitude
of the coefficient of thermal conduction when needed. Another, used in
this work, is to
proceed by operator splitting, such that the operator advancing the
variables in time is FORMULA , then solving
the conduction operator implicitly, for example using the multigrid method.
Radiative losses from the
photosphere and chromosphere are optically thick and require the solution of the transport equation. A sophisticated
treatment of this difficult problem was devised by
{{cite:56e7222d-119b-4eb1-83ea-20df23db48bd}} in which opacities are binned according to their
magnitude; in effect one is constructing wavelength bins that represent
stronger and weaker lines and the continuum so that radiation in all
atmospheric regions is treated to a certain approximation.
If one further assumes that opacities are in LTE
the radiation from the photosphere can be modeled. Modeling the chromosphere
requires that the scattering of photons is treated with greater care
({{cite:1d5af7b1-f6fe-43b8-9f4e-e30bf9c61363}}), or in addition that one uses methods assuming
that chromospheric radiation can be tabulated as a function of local
thermodynamic variables a priori.
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
In this paper we have used the methods mentioned to solve the MHD equations,
including thermal conduction and non-grey non-LTE radiative transfer.
The numerical scheme used is an extended version of the numerical code described
in {{cite:f7c5e6de-ce9a-423b-83c3-69b1b3f321be}}, {{cite:311d0ca9-e458-4caa-83cb-c5d4d1077deb}} and in more detail
by Nordlund & Galsgaard at http://www.astro.ku.dk/FORMULA kg.
In short, the code functions as follows: The variables are represented
on staggered meshes, such that the density FORMULA  and the internal energy
FORMULA  are volume centered, the magnetic field components FORMULA  and the momentum densities
FORMULA  are face centered, while the electric field FORMULA 
and the current FORMULA  are edge centered. A sixth order accurate
method involving the three nearest neighbor points on each side is
used for determining the partial spatial derivatives. In the cases where
variables are needed at positions other than their defined positions
a fifth order interpolation scheme is used. The equations are stepped
forward in time using the explicit 3rd order predictor-corrector
procedure by {{cite:5f74c400-c7b0-4e10-a669-3a78d526212f}}, modified for variable time steps.
In order to suppress numerical noise, high-order artificial diffusion is added both
in the forms of a viscosity and in the form of a magnetic diffusivity.

3d Models
The models described here are run on a box of dimension 16FORMULA 8FORMULA 16 MmFORMULA 
resolved on a grid of FORMULA  points, equidistant in FORMULA  and FORMULA  but with
increasing grid size with height in the FORMULA  direction. At this resolution the model
has been run a few minutes solar time starting from an earlier simulation with half the
resolution presented here. The lower resolution simulation had run some 20 minutes solar
time, starting from a (partially) relaxed convective atmosphere in which a potential
field with field strengths of order 1 kG at the lower
boundary and an average unsigned field strength of 100 G in the photosphere
was added. The convective atmosphere has been built up from successively
larger models, and has run of order an hour solar time; some periodicities are still
apparent at lower heights where the time scales are longer (of order several hours near
the lower boundary).
The initial potential magnetic field was designed to have
properties similar to those observed in the solar photosphere. The average
temperature at the bottom boundary is maintained by setting the entropy
of the fluid entering through the bottom boundary. The bottom boundary,
based on characteristic extrapolation, is otherwise open, allowing fluid
to enter and leave the computational domain as required. The magnetic
field at the lower boundary is advected with the fluid. As the
simulation progresses the field is advected with the fluid flow in the
convection zone and photosphere and individual field lines quickly
attain quite complex paths throughout the model.
A vertical cut of the temperature structure in the model is shown in
Figure REF .
In Figure REF  we show the emergent intensity in various continua
as calculated a posteriori from a data cube some minutes into the simulation
run. Though the analysis of these intensities is far from complete (the model is
still in some need of further relaxation) a number of observed solar characteristics
are recognized. Solar granulation seems faithfully reproduced in the 300 nm and 500 nm
bands including bright patches/points in intergranular lanes where the magnetic field is
strong. Reverse granulation is evident in the 170 nm band as is enhanced
emission where the magnetic field is strong. Bright emission in the bands formed higher
in the chromosphere is a result of both strong magnetic fields as well as hydrodynamic
shocks propagating through the chromosphere.
The field in the models described here was originally potential. However, it is rapidly
deformed by convective motions in the photosphere and below and becomes concentrated in
down-flowing granulation plumes on a granulation time-scale. In regions below
where FORMULA  the magnetic field is at the mercy of plasma motions,
above the field expands, attempts to fill all space, and forms loop like structures.
The FORMULA  component of the magnetic field in the photosphere
is shown in the upper panel of Figure REF , also
plotted are magnetic field lines chosen on the basis of their strength at the surface where
FORMULA . The same field lines seen from the side are plotted in the lower panel of
Figure REF  overplotted the vertical magnetic field FORMULA .
FIGURE 
Chromospheric energetics and dynamics are set by a number of factors. Among
the most important of these are acoustic waves generated in the photosphere and
convection zone impinging on the chromosphere from below; the topology of the magnetic
field and the location of the plasma FORMULA  surface; the amount of chromospheric
heating due the dissipation of magnetic energy; non-LTE radiative losses and related
phenomena such as time dependent ionization and recombination. Most of these phenomena
with the exception of time dependent ionization is accounted for (to various degrees
of accuracy) in the models presented here. The latter is currently under
implementation ({{cite:816e7ada-c35d-4d30-9dc4-c9f65af0b920}}). Examples of the chromospheric temperature
structure and its relation to the magnetic field are shown in Figures REF 
and REF .
As the stresses in the coronal field grow so does the energy density of
the field. This energy must eventually be dissipated; at a rate commensurate with
the rate at which energy flux is pumped in. This will depend on the strength of the magnetic
field and on the amplitude of convective forcing. On the Sun the magnetic diffusivity
FORMULA  is very small and gradients must become very large before dissipation
occurs; in the models presented here we operate with an FORMULA  many orders
of magnitude larger than on the Sun and dissipation starts at much smaller magnetic
field gradients. Even so, it seems the model is able to reproduce diagnostics that
resemble those observed in the solar transition region and corona as shown in
Figure REF . (It is also interesting to note that we find emission
from O vi 103.7 nm in a narrow ray up to 6 Mm above the photosphere, much higher
than it should be found in a hydrostatically stratified model.)

Conclusions
The model presented here seems a very promising starting point and tool for achieving
an understanding of the outer solar layers. But perhaps a word or two of caution
is in order before we celebrate our successes. Are the tests we
are subjecting the model to — e.g. the comparison of synthetic observations
with actual observations actually capable of separating a correct description of
the sun from an incorrect one? Conduction along field lines will naturally make loop like
structures. This implies that reproducing TRACE-like “images” is perhaps not
so difficult after all, and possible for a wide spectrum of coronal heating
models. The transition region diagnostics are a more discerning test, but clearly
it is still too early to say that the only possible coronal model has been
identified. It will be very interesting to see how these forward coronal heating
models stand up in the face of questions such as: How does the corona react to
variations in the total field strength, or the total field topology, and what
observable diagnostic signatures do these variations cause? One could also wonder
about the role of emerging flux in coronal heating: How much new magnetic flux
must be brought up from below in order to replenish the dissipation of field
heating the chromosphere and corona?
This work was supported by the Research Council of Norway grant
146467/420 and a grant of computing time from the Program for
Supercomputing.
