
ucsdthesis


UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, SAN DIEGO

Strongly Interacting Higgs Sector Without Technicolor

A dissertation submitted in partial satisfaction of the

requirements for the degree Doctor of Philosophy

in Physics

by

Chuan Liu

Commīttee in charge:
Professor Julius G. Kuti, Chairman
Professor Aneesh V. Manohar
Professor James G. Branson
Professor Bruce K. Driver
Professor Jeffrey M. Rabin

1994

Copyright
Chuan Liu, 1994
All rights reserved.
tocschapterSignature Page



The dissertation of Chuan Liu is approved, and it is
acceptable in quality and form for publication on
microfilm:










 Chairman 

University of California, San Diego

1994

tocschapterDedication Page



To my wife Dan
my parents and grandparents


Acknowledgements
It has been a very pleasant and fruitful six years for me to stay at
Department of Physics at UCSD, during which many friends helped me in
many ways. Here I want to express my appreciation to them.
First, I would like to thank my advisor, Professor Julius Kuti, for his
continued energy and enthusiasm
under all circumstances.
He encourages me to enter the exciting fields of high energy
physics and field theory and keeps
stimulating my interests in the field.
He has given me not only important directions on physics research
but also precious advices on how to be a physicist.
It was from many intriguing discussions with him
that I gained so much knowledge of physics.
Without his patient guidance, it would be much more
difficult for me to complete this work
satisfactorily.
I would also like to thank the other members of my committee
(Professor Aneesh Manohar, Professor
James Branson, Professor Bruce Driver and Professor
Jeffrey M. Rabin) for taking the time to review my work
and giving me helpful suggestions.
I should also thank the following Professors at UCSD Physics
Department from whom I benefit so much in their lectures:
Professor D. Arovas, Professor P. Diamond,
Professor R. Dashen, Professor H. Levine and
Professor H. Paar.
Special thanks go to Dr. Karl Jansen, who helped me so much
in many ways. He has been a collaborator with me for
quite some time and I have benefited a great deal from
discussions with him. It has always been a great pleasure
for me to work with him.
Bonnie Horstmann and Debra Bomar
in the Physics Office have helped
a lot. I would especially thank
Mary Ann for her help on the administrative works and her patient
reading the thesis and correcting the language mistakes.
Many friends have supported and encouraged me throughout this journey,
among them, Y. Shen, L. Lin, X. Che, X. Hong, G. Sun, Z, Guralnik,
M. Schmaltz, C. Chen, X. Zou, W. Zhang and Y. Liang.
I would also like to thank my parents and my grandmother
for their understanding and support.
Finally, I would like to thank my wife Dan Wei, not only for her
moral support , but also for her patience of
reading the
thesis and even debugging the programs. Without her continued
encouragement and help, it would have been very difficult for me
to accomplish this goal successfully.

Vita
1111111111111111111
14 February 1966  Born, Beijing, P. R. China
1988  B.S. in Physics,
 Peking University, Beijing, P. R. China
1988-1994  Research/Teaching Assistant,
 University of California, San Diego
1991  M.S. in Physics,
 University of California, San Diego
1994  Ph.D. in Physics,
 University of California, San Diego

Publications

K. Jansen, J. Kuti and C. Liu, Phys. Lett. B 309, (1993) 119.

K. Jansen, J. Kuti and C. Liu, Phys. Lett. B 309, (1993) 127.

K. Jansen, J. Kuti and C. Liu,
Nucl. Phys. B 30 (Proc. Suppl.),(1993) 681.

C. Liu, K. Jansen and J. Kuti,
Nucl. Phys. B 34 (Proc. Suppl.),(1994) 635.


Strongly Interacting Higgs Sector Without Technicolor


by

Chuan Liu
Doctor of Philosophy in Physics
University of California, San Diego, 1994
Professor Julius Kuti, Chairman


The theoretical framework
for the higher derivative FORMULA  scalar field
theory is established and the theory is
shown to be finite and unitary
with the indefinite metric quantization.
It has been shown that if the ghost states are
represented by a complex conjugate pair, the theory
is free of any logical inconsistencies and the ghost pair can
easily evade the experimental tests.
With an underlying hypercubic lattice structure,
the higher derivative FORMULA  model is
studied nonperturbatively in computer simulations.
The Higgs mass bound problem is also studied within
the framework of higher derivative theory. A much
higher Higgs mass value in the TeV range is found
with the ghost pair well-hidden in the multi-TeV range.
Therefore, the higher derivative FORMULA  model can
incorporate a strongly interacting Higgs sector
without introducing
more complicated structures, like technicolor, which
was impossible for the conventional lattice scalar model.
This means that, although the added higher derivative term
is a higher dimensional operator,
it changes the fundamental features (metric, energy spectrum,
strength of interaction, etc.) of the theory so
much that we can no longer view it as an irrelevant operator
in the Lagrangian. Moreover, due to the strong interaction
of the theory, it would be impossible to meaningfully define
the scaling violation in the higher derivative FORMULA  model.
This implies that we will not be able to set up
the Higgs mass bound in this theory unless a
new nonperturbative interpretation of the
Higgs mass bound is developed.


Introduction

The Higgs Sector of the Minimal Standard Model
The Standard Model was first
introduced in the late 1960's to unify the electromagnetic and
weak interactions {{cite:54155f4a-5b7e-4e86-92ce-ef8de1f0e156}}, {{cite:82f4992a-f2c9-4f0e-8172-d514e36698e6}}, {{cite:986149a7-9e1a-4b4c-9f2d-4a2b244ec9be}}. The symmetry group of
the Standard Model is
FORMULA .
The Minimal Standard Model corresponds to taking only
one Higgs doublet in the basic representation of FORMULA .
The action of the Standard Model consists of several sectors
which are coupled together.
The action of the Higgs sector for the theory can be written
as:
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is a FORMULA -doublet Higgs field,
FORMULA 
and the potential can be written as:
FORMULA 
In the limit of small gauge coupling and Yukawa
coupling, the Higgs sector decouples from the rest and becomes a
FORMULA  type scalar field theory with a global symmetry FORMULA .
This limit is also referred to as the FORMULA  limit of the
Minimal Standard Model.
In the Standard Model, the symmetry FORMULA  is
spontaneously broken to FORMULA , which, in the FORMULA  limit,
corresponds to the symmetry breaking FORMULA .
In this limit, the Higgs mass and the vacuum expectation value
FORMULA  are related by
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the renormalized coupling constant.
The experimental value for FORMULA  is fixed to be FORMULA  GeV.
Therefore, the ratio FORMULA  also characterizes
the strength of the quartic self-interaction.
The FORMULA  limit of the Standard Model is a very interesting
limit to study for two reasons. First of all, the
FORMULA  gauge coupling is found to be very small,
FORMULA . Therefore, the effects of the gauge fields
on the Higgs sector is perturbative.
Although the mass of the top quark remains to be
determined, it is unlikely that the top mass will be much higher than
200 GeV. All the quark masses are
rather light compared with the weak scale, therefore the effects of
the fermion sector can also be evaluated within perturbation theory.
In other words, the symmetry breaking mechanism is almost completely
determined by the Higgs sector alone, plus some perturbative corrections.
Secondly, on the phenomenology side, people have shown a so-called
Equivalence Theorem {{cite:ad5196a1-cdb5-43e4-b3da-55cea167d06c}} which says: when the center of mass energy
FORMULA  is much higher than the FORMULA  boson mass, the scattering
amplitude of the FORMULA  bosons in the full Standard Model is equal to
the scattering amplitude of the corresponding channel in the
FORMULA  model with FORMULA  corrections.
One of the methods in the Higgs search experiment is utilizing
the FORMULA  or FORMULA  boson scattering channel.
Therefore, if we consider the energy range for the Higgs
search, assuming that the Higgs mass
is above the vev scale or even in the TeV range, the FORMULA  limit
would be a good approximation for the FORMULA  scattering in the
Standard Model.
Thus, we conclude that the FORMULA  limit of the
Standard Model would be a very good laboratory for the investigation
of the symmetry breaking mechanism and the mass of the Higgs particle.

 The Triviality Higgs Mass Bound 
Despite the successes of the Standard Model, two types of
particle that are important in this model remain unconvinced by the
experiments, namely, the top quark and the Higgs particle. The missing
of the Higgs particle is very problematic because the Higgs plays such an
important role in the spontaneous symmetry breaking which
gives rise to all
the masses of gauge bosons and fermions.
In the past decade, there have been many efforts to put an upper bound
on the Higgs mass. The early works utilized the tree level unitarity
and the unitarity bound was found to be around 1 TeV {{cite:ad5196a1-cdb5-43e4-b3da-55cea167d06c}}.
Later, it was then realized that the FORMULA  scalar field theory is a trivial
field theory and this implies an upper bound on the Higgs mass
{{cite:373cffb9-d8cc-451b-bc15-a2a0278f0157}}, {{cite:648a955f-cc13-45ca-b446-19c9112b925f}}.
The triviality picture of field theory
was first encountered by Landau et. al.
long ago when studying the renormalization properties of Quantum
Electrodynamics (QED) {{cite:784f453d-2995-461e-bec3-cd4adc9d3de5}}.
They discovered that, if the
cutoff was brought to infinity in QED, the renormalized coupling constant
of QED (the electric charge)
was driven to zero logarithmically. Therefore, in order to
have an interacting theory, a large but finite cutoff had to remain
in the theory. Thus, QED has a built-in
cutoff parameter.
This implies that
every quantity calculated in QED depends on this arbitrary
cutoff parameter. As the energy scale gets closer and
closer to the cutoff, there is more dependence on this
arbitrary cutoff parameter. It seems then that we will
lose the predictability of the theory.
In fact, this is not a problem at all for QED. The built-in
cutoff scale, also know as the Landau ghost scale, is enormous
(typically FORMULA  MeV) for
QED and therefore the dependence of the physical quantities on this cutoff
scale is negligible. Furthermore, before this energy scale is reached,
new physics (weak interactions, strong interactions)
will set in and QED must be modified.
However, one thing becomes clear from the above discussion, namely,
we cannot calculate to arbitrary accuracy in a trivial field theory
due to the existence of the arbitrary cutoff parameter.
The triviality scenario of the Higgs sector
is quite similar to that of QED, except that
in the Higgs sector we do not
know the mass of the Higgs and the coupling constant.
Therefore, the built-in
cutoff for the Higgs sector could be as low as a few TeV, or as
high as the Planck scale, depending on the value of the Higgs mass.
Also, we do not know the nature of the new physics that lies between
the built-in cutoff and the weak scale, if there is any.
The triviality of the Higgs sector can be easily seen
in either perturbation theory or
in the FORMULA  expansion {{cite:be2a246d-5e3b-4009-aaba-31ebd74a8e7a}} of the model. Extensive
nonperturbative studies have also been performed on this
model with a lattice regulator {{cite:2d7952b1-2a5c-4e23-9807-a9b9069ccd7b}}, {{cite:49234004-c5f3-44e1-aa0e-fe1be3d92eba}}, {{cite:145350f4-25ef-4151-b15f-49462bb633ee}}.
All nonperturbative simulation results suggest that the
triviality scenario found in perturbation theory
is a feature of the full theory. In these studies, the upper
bound of the Higgs particle was found to be about
640 GeV under some well defined conditions which we now come to.
With the lattice regulator, the theory is made finite and the momentum
cutoff is given by FORMULA . The continuum limit is achieved by
taking FORMULA , or equivalently, taking the
lattice correlation length FORMULA . For very large
FORMULA , triviality of the theory forces the renormalized
coupling constant FORMULA  to go to zero logarithmically. Since
the vacuum expectation value FORMULA  is fixed in physical units, this
would mean the Higgs mass is also going to zero in this limit
like FORMULA . Making a larger
Higgs mass is therefore equivalent to bringing down the cutoff FORMULA 
relative to the Higgs mass. Of course, this will generate larger cutoff
dependent terms (scaling violation) in the physical scattering cross section.
In the case of the lattice cutoff, the scaling violation is represented
by the violation of Euclidean invariance.
The old triviality Higgs mass bound was
obtained by demanding that in a Goldstone scattering process
(which is equivalent to FORMULA  scattering in the Standard Model
according to the Equivalence Theorem),
there was not more than a few percent Euclidean invariance violation in the
scattering cross section {{cite:49234004-c5f3-44e1-aa0e-fe1be3d92eba}}.
It is evident from the above discussion
that two things are crucial to set up the triviality
mass bound of the Higgs particle. First, one has to know what
the scaling violation will be when a certain type of regulator is introduced.
Second, one has to have a well-defined method to calculate this
scaling violation for a given set of parameters.
In the case of the lattice Higgs bound study, the scaling violation
is the Euclidean invariance violation and the method to calculate
it is perturbation theory. Perturbation theory is a valid approach
for the Higgs sector,
because for all Higgs mass values below the bound,
the coupling is weak enough for meaningful perturbative expansion.
The old triviality Higgs mass
bound was rather low because even at the upper
bound value the renormalized coupling constant of the theory remains
perturbative. In terms of the Higgs mass over
vev ratio, FORMULA  is only about 3.
Further increase to the Higgs mass results in
a scattering amplitude with large lattice effects and can no longer represent
the low energy continuum theory. Therefore,
if the hypercubic lattice will not be the new
physics, then the existence of
a strongly interacting Higgs sector is excluded in a lattice regulated
scalar field theory.
There has been great concern that this finding was
an artifact of the lattice regulator itself which breaks Euclidean
invariance. This concern is reasonable if we consider
the analogue in QCD. We know that the linear sigma model,
which is nothing but the FORMULA  model in the broken phase,
will generate the right physics
of QCD at low energies (low energy theorems, PCAC, etc.).
However, the corresponding ratio FORMULA 
is much higher than in the Higgs case.
Based on this analogy, technicolor models have been introduced which offers
a possibility of strongly interacting Higgs sector.
Due to the strong interacting nature of the technicolor at low
energies, perturbation theory breaks down. Most of the analytic
calculations are therefore performed using the effective chiral
Lagrangian methods. A complete nonperturbative simulation of the
technicolor theory including the dynamical fermions is very costly.
Therefore, it would be nice to have a scalar model that can incorporate
a strongly interacting Higgs sector.
People have tried to perform the lattice calculation
with better Euclidean invariance for the scalar models.
The first significant increase of the Higgs mass
bound (750 GeV) was reported
{{cite:893e55ab-b619-44d9-8860-c5a9265722bc}} within the Symanzik improvement program
on a hypercubic lattice structure {{cite:f93d122a-e6cb-4e39-839a-2df075f026bd}}. Similar results on
different lattice structures, with higher dimensional lattice operators
in the interaction term, have also been reported {{cite:7f5d6bd8-bd6f-40ef-a7b3-574ce97aba29}}.
In this thesis, I will study
the scalar sector of the Minimal Standard Model and the Higgs
mass problem by adding a higher derivative term in the kinetic
energy of the Higgs Lagrangian. With the higher derivative term,
we have a finite FORMULA  scalar field theory interacting via a
quartic coupling constant.

Higher Derivative Field Theory and Indefinite Metric
Quantization
There have been serious concerns about the potential difficulties
in higher derivative field theories
{{cite:c5da66df-d1e8-435b-8d71-7c53468edb58}}, {{cite:39b46fc5-55f9-4fc1-9910-bbcddb6a92fa}}, {{cite:1511f66b-3463-4126-869e-c84d11a4b8a6}}, {{cite:d92de97e-bf63-4650-81f8-ebd374ae504c}}, {{cite:7930a53e-de1d-4483-958a-90ae5506ac4b}}, {{cite:0d518c0e-0465-455d-b27a-671212245e15}}, {{cite:7061f092-4a4a-4e67-90a2-a6f1bda37f22}}, {{cite:2f23a85e-c1c3-4d28-afa3-9f63016f899f}}, {{cite:2f0ddb14-3533-4fc0-8f51-fa5953bd2a41}}, {{cite:829bb6dc-4bc2-4df3-a8c1-17d0e5f8ed30}}, {{cite:d3d9d51a-43b0-4a8f-bd7d-0fe71627c0f8}}, {{cite:dda5a05d-343c-4bd9-8878-81a3e8217fa2}}.
I will briefly mention some of these difficulties in
this section, and the detailed
study will be the subject of the subsequent chapters.
First of all, as we will see in Chapter (), the conventional
quantization procedure does not offer a meaningful theory because
the spectrum is neither bounded below nor above. So, finding new ways of
quantizing the higher derivative theory is necessary. One of the
choices is the indefinite metric quantization {{cite:29741b77-9b21-4beb-8c12-84fbdb2f5d09}}, {{cite:2f23a85e-c1c3-4d28-afa3-9f63016f899f}}, {{cite:0d518c0e-0465-455d-b27a-671212245e15}}. By
doing this the theory has a unique vacuum but, in the meantime, the
positivity of the norm in the Hilbert space is lost.
Therefore, one has
to identify a subspace in the full Hilbert space as the physical
space and maintain all the physical principles.
Unitarity is one of
these principles that one would like to maintain because this is
at the heart of any quantum theory for which Born's probability
description still applies. Before any meaningfully
interpretation of negative probability is found,
unitarity should be preserved in any physical theory. This is
a big challenge for the higher derivative theories simply
because the full Hilbert space is not positively normed, and negative
normed states, also called ghost states, may violate unitarity.
This is one of the main reasons why many people have
abandoned the higher derivative field theories. However,
I will demonstrate that, there could be a scenario in which the ghost particles
are represented as a complex conjugate pair,
and unitarity is maintained {{cite:d92de97e-bf63-4650-81f8-ebd374ae504c}}, {{cite:0d518c0e-0465-455d-b27a-671212245e15}}, {{cite:6e7760e6-b8df-4b47-a706-c3e997126237}}.
This possibility was first pointed out by T. D. Lee in the late
sixties. There have been a lot of discussions on this issue and
it still remains quite controversial.
Causality is another principle of the physical theory. As has been
pointed out earlier by Lee {{cite:d92de97e-bf63-4650-81f8-ebd374ae504c}}, with the complex conjugate ghost pair,
only microscopic causality is violated, and macroscopically it is
very difficult to detect in the experiments (see Chapter () for
further information).

 Higgs Mass Problem in Higher Derivative Scalar Field Theory
It is very interesting to study the Higgs mass bound problem in
this higher derivative scalar field theory.
There have always been several ways of viewing this theory.
The first and most conventional
way is to view it as the Pauli-Villars regulated Higgs
theory {{cite:0051db0c-7761-4b13-a329-2e9b37d157a8}}, {{cite:0d518c0e-0465-455d-b27a-671212245e15}}, {{cite:7536ab34-a256-45d7-ba2b-b1bad666b341}}, {{cite:e74a4a49-4511-43fd-ad06-f1da0665a238}}.
The second is to view it as a stand-alone, finite,
well-defined theory with ghosts.
The third is to view it as some truncated expansion of the
effective low energy theory after the degrees of freedom representing
the new physics have been integrated out.
The original full theory probably has no ghost states, but after the
truncation of the full series, the model may contain
ghost excitations.
Obviously, the distinction between the second and the third view
is ambiguous since we do not know what the full theory should be.
The first view, however, should be taken very carefully.
Strictly speaking, this view is only valid in the limit of
small FORMULA  ratio, where FORMULA  is the Higgs mass and FORMULA  is the
Pauli-Villars mass parameter. If the mass of the Higgs is getting
close to the Pauli-Villars mass parameter, we have to take the
second view and treat the theory as a finite theory with ghosts.
In the limit of FORMULA ,
this finite theory coincides with
the conventional FORMULA  scalar field theory with a Pauli-Villars
cutoff. When the Higgs mass scale is comparable with the ghost
parameter, the higher derivative field theory becomes a theory with
complicated particle contents.
To study the Higgs mass bound problem in the higher derivative
FORMULA  model, we have to answer the same two questions. First, what
is the scaling violation; second, how does one calculate it?
The answer to the first question is not easy in the case of the
higher derivative theory. Naively thinking, one would expect there should
be some ghost effects. However, despite the negative metric ghost
states in the theory, it remains unitary and the scattering cross
section of ordinary particles looks perfectly normal (see
Chapter () for details).
The only unusual effect
found for the higher derivative FORMULA  model is the
violation of microscopic causality. As has been mentioned above,
this type of acausal effect is extremely difficult to detect.
That is to say, introducing the higher derivative terms to the
theory makes the theory finite, only at the cost of violating
microscopic causality, which is invisible for practical reasons.
One might still worry that, in this theory, all the results will depend on
the ghost mass parameter and this is some sort of scaling violation.
This leads us to the second fundamental
question of the problem, namely, how to calculate the scaling
violations.
Obviously, if the Higgs particle remains light and the theory
is still in the perturbative regime, we can do the perturbative
calculation and find out how the scattering amplitude depends on
the new parameter FORMULA . Whether to call it the scaling violation
is still a question. It is some deviation from the Minimal Standard
Model in the perturbative range.
However, if the Higgs is heavy and the
interaction is getting stronger, we will not be able to find out
the scaling violation simply because we have nothing to compare with.
In a strong interacting theory, we have no idea what the universal
scattering amplitude will look like. In fact, we do not know how to
define such a quantity meaningfully.
A new nonperturbative
interpretation of the Higgs mass bound therefore becomes necessary.
From the above discussion, we can see that there are several
major differences between the higher derivative theory and the
conventional theory on the lattice in regards to the Higgs
mass bound problem. First, the scaling violation in the conventional
theory with the lattice regulator is unambiguously defined, both
perturbatively and nonperturbatively. Even without the help of the
perturbation theory, we can quantify the violation of the Euclidean
invariance meaningfully {{cite:1e72222d-9178-4dfa-a1ba-70b6ba78e840}}. In the higher derivative case,
however, the scaling violation is not well-defined, at least not
nonperturbatively. One can try to search the FORMULA  dependence of the
theory only in perturbation theory.
Although the higher derivative theory is a finite theory, it still
has infinite degrees of freedom. In order to carry out
a nonperturbative simulation of the model, one must make the number
of degree of freedom finite. This can be done by introducing an
underlying hypercubic lattice structure to the model. The lattice
spacing FORMULA  introduces a new short distance energy scale with
the associated lattice momentum cutoff FORMULA . In order to
recover the higher derivative theory in the continuum, one would have
to work towards the limit FORMULA  with a fixed
ratio of FORMULA . In so doing, the higher derivative FORMULA  model
has the same scaling violation as the conventional model, that is,
it violates Euclidean invariance. In the lattice higher derivative
model, in order to recover the corresponding continuum model, one
only has to eliminate the scaling violation that is associated with
the lattice.
For the higher derivative model on the lattice, one can view it
as the conventional model on the lattice plus some so-called
higher dimensional (or irrelevant) operators.
Recently, Neuberger et. al. {{cite:7f5d6bd8-bd6f-40ef-a7b3-574ce97aba29}}
reported a new Higgs mass bound based
on the systematic search in all the dimension 6 operators added
to the conventional Higgs model on the FORMULA  lattice.
Based on their study, they claim that
the triviality Higgs mass bound is
FORMULA  GeV, and this bound value is
universal in the sense that no other higher dimensional
operators will change it. However, our model discussed herein
contradicts their conclusion. Our model can be viewed as
the conventional model plus one dimension 8 operator, which
is supposed to be irrelevant according to their study. However, from
all our simulation results, we can easily drive the Higgs mass
value into the TeV range (see Chapter ()
for more details). We believe that the so-called “irrelevant
operators” are not irrelevant at all, at least not for the Higgs
mass bound problem. After all, by adding new dimension 6 irrelevant
operators, Neuberger et. al. have found a rather different bound.
Therefore, the notion of irrelevant operators is a very misleading
one as far as the Higgs mass bound problem is concerned.
As we discussed above, in our model,
it is impossible to set up a precise Higgs mass bound
due to the strong interaction. However, the model is
able to accommodate a Higgs particle which is heavier than the
old Higgs mass bounds with no lattice scaling violations.
My thesis is organized as follows: in Chapter 2 ,
the quantization of the higher derivative theory is
established using indefinite metric quantization.
In Chapter 3, the higher derivative FORMULA  model is
studied within the framework of FORMULA  expansion and
the important issue of
unitarity and causality are also discussed
. In Chapter 4, the lattice version of the
higher derivative field theory is presented and the possibility
of nonperturbative studies using Monte Carlo simulation is discussed,
and the symmetry breaking mechanism in the finite
volume is studied within the Born-Oppenheimer approximation.
In Chapter 5,
numerical results of the simulation are presented and analyzed.
These simulation results demonstrate
that the interaction of the higher derivative
scalar field theory is much stronger than the conventional
scalar field theory. Therefore, a heavy Higgs particle in the
TeV range becomes a real possibility in the theory.
Chapter 6 discusses the extraction of the resonance
parameters of the unstable Higgs particle in the finite volume
using finite size techniques. This method, first suggested by
Lüscher {{cite:eecb6dea-3636-40e6-bb74-6babfdd8dbbc}}, {{cite:6d69cf20-a062-4748-8131-05620b17054a}}, has proved to work very well for the
conventional FORMULA  model {{cite:784ae573-0e05-4b78-b3c9-3a51f8eab438}}, {{cite:5397a205-98a0-4ff2-b1d4-db07df6d6d99}}.
We demonstrate that this also
works in the higher derivative FORMULA  model after
appropriate adjustments. In fact, we believe this is the
only sensible way to extract the mass parameter in the simulation
of a strongly interacting theory.

Higher Derivative Field Theories
and Indefinite Metric Quantization

Higher Derivative Oscillator
Classical Hamiltonian
Many important features of higher derivative field theories can
be illustrated by their simple quantum mechanical counterparts. As
an example, let us first study a higher derivative oscillator
{{cite:d61afb23-e417-46b8-9440-9cd3671b5410}}
given by the following Lagrangian
FORMULA 
This Lagrangian describes a simple harmonic oscillator of
frequency FORMULA  with second and third derivative terms added.
For simple interpretation of the spectrum, the coefficients of
the derivative terms are given in terms of FORMULA  and FORMULA ;
the only restrictions imposed are FORMULA  and FORMULA .
With the higher derivative terms added,
this Lagrangian produces new features that are not present in the conventional
theory. Classically, one can look at the time evolution of the
position FORMULA  which is a solution of the
corresponding Euler-Lagrange equation
FORMULA 
Some of the new features of the higher derivative theory
already appear at the classical level. For example, in order
to specify the solution, one has to know more initial conditions
than in the usual theory. In this particular example, one needs to
know FORMULA  to specify a unique solution,
where FORMULA  denotes the FORMULA -th time derivative of
the variable FORMULA .
This in fact tells us that the higher derivative theory has
more degrees of freedom than the conventional theory.
Another new feature is that
there are runaway solutions to this classical
equation of motion {{cite:18d4b39e-10f9-4333-9205-25ea8eaa4882}}.
The Hamiltonian of a higher derivative Lagrangian
was worked out long time ago by
Ostrogradsky {{cite:3c3c082f-8dd9-4d3f-b1cb-9d17e038b2fe}}. In the Hamiltonian formalism, new degrees
of freedom show up explicitly due to the higher derivative terms. In this
particular example, there are three independent coordinates and their
corresponding conjugate momenta, given by
FORMULA 
Notice that FORMULA  is not proportional to FORMULA  any more.
Instead, both FORMULA  and FORMULA  become independent variables.
In terms of these variables the Hamiltonian reads
FORMULA 
The classical equation of motion can be written out in the
Hamiltonian form
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  runs from 1 to 3. It is easy to verify that
the Hamilton equations of motion are equivalent to the Euler-Lagrange form,
once we have expressed everything in terms of FORMULA 
and its time derivatives.
Note , however, that this Hamiltonian does not look like the conventional
Hamiltonian at all. The limit of small FORMULA  is a singular limit, and
we will not be able to recover the standard oscillator Hamiltonian by
taking this limit.

Quantization
Let us now try to quantize this Hamiltonian with the
conventional canonical method. We will treat FORMULA , FORMULA  and
FORMULA  as independent variables and they have the usual
commutator with the corresponding momenta
FORMULA 
with other commutators vanishing. This already
says something unusual about this quantum theory, namely that
the position of a particle and its velocity
are independent variables and can be measured
simultaneously; while in conventional quantum mechanics
they form a conjugate pair and cannot be measured simultaneously.
In the higher derivative theory, it is the quantity FORMULA  that
cannot be simultaneously measured with FORMULA .
From the expression of FORMULA ,
it implies that the
measurement of FORMULA  together with FORMULA ,
FORMULA  together with FORMULA  and
FORMULA  together with FORMULA  are impossible.
It is not very easy to see that
the quadratic Hamiltonian in
Equation (REF ) still
represents the oscillator spectrum.
In fact, using a linear transformation, the quadratic part
of the Hamiltonian can be diagonalized exactly
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  and FORMULA . The creation and
annihilation operators appeared in the
above equation are linear combinations
of FORMULA  and FORMULA  and satisfy the
following standard commutation relations:
FORMULA 
The other commutators all vanish.
This type of spectrum has many problems {{cite:d61afb23-e417-46b8-9440-9cd3671b5410}}.
It is not bounded below, not even the real part.
Therefore, no ground state exists in this theory. This unboundedness is
a very common feature to all higher derivative quantum theories.
It is a direct reflection of the the “wrong sign” in front of
one of the quadratic terms in the Hamiltonian.
One way of dealing with these problems is to try another
quantization procedure and this is where indefinite metric
quantization {{cite:ed770717-24c6-4d97-bbdd-9f8810f00266}}, {{cite:d2673d33-f736-4f9f-890d-f98958749797}}, {{cite:5620ed50-f3e9-4d38-ba9f-b1156b401f14}} comes in.
The idea of using negative metric in the quantization procedure
was introduced long ago, especially for the
quantization of gauge fields {{cite:5620ed50-f3e9-4d38-ba9f-b1156b401f14}}.
In this framework, the full Hilbert space is too large
for physical interests. It contains negative normed states which are
necessary for the consistent quantization.
The negative normed states must be removed from the
physical subspace to maintain the probability interpretation
of the theory. We will apply the same idea here {{cite:880d3c85-1c6f-4c5c-a6b1-52edbc7e73ff}}.
First, notice that by appropriate scaling: FORMULA  and FORMULA , with
FORMULA  and by the change
FORMULA , we can rewrite the
Hamiltonian into the following form
FORMULA 
Now make the substitution
FORMULA 
This will not change the commutator of FORMULA  and FORMULA  and we may
write the Hamiltonian as
FORMULA 
where the P's and Q's are related to original variables
by the following table
FORMULA 
We have used the matrix notation FORMULA  and FORMULA  and
the mass matrix FORMULA  is
FORMULA 
Negative metric quantization corresponds to
demanding that the FORMULA 's and FORMULA 's
are hermitian, so the Hamiltonian (REF )
itself is not hermitian. Rather, it is self-adjoint with respect
to a metric operator FORMULA  satisfying
FORMULA 
In this indefinite Hilbert space, the inner product of any two
states, FORMULA  and FORMULA , is defined to be
FORMULA . It is easy to show that
the expectation value of any self-adjoint operator is real
in any states.
Therefore, the expectation value of the
Hamiltonian in any state is real, although the eigenvalues
of the Hamiltonian may be complex.
This immediately implies that the complex energy
eigenstates have zero norm.
The dynamics of any state
vector are still governed by the Schrödinger equation
FORMULA 
It is easy to show that the norm of a state is still preserved
under time evolution.

Diagonalization
We can now perform transformation of the variables
FORMULA  and FORMULA  according to a “rotation”  FORMULA
FORMULA 
and diagonalize the mass matrix FORMULA . The eigenvalues of this matrix
are simply given by FORMULA , FORMULA 
and FORMULA .
This is why we chose complicated parametrization of the Lagrangian.
Therefore, we can define the creation and annihilation operators as
FORMULA 
These operators satisfy the standard commutation relation
FORMULA 
and the Hamiltonian has the standard oscillator form
FORMULA 
The ground state is defined to be the state which is simultaneously
annihilated by FORMULA , FORMULA  and FORMULA .
We assume that the
ground state is positively normed to 1. Negative metric is seen from
the adjoint relations among the creation and annihilation operators
FORMULA 
We can then build up our full Hilbert space by applying the various
creation operators to the ground state. The eigenvalues of the
Hamiltonian can, in general, be complex if the complex ghost pair
is not evenly excited. All the eigenstates with
complex energy have zero norms. This is a common feature for all
self-adjoint Hamiltonians. The excited states are constructed and
normalized according to
FORMULA 

Ground State Wave Function
We can work out the coordinate space wavefunction for the ground
state by substituting the old variables. We get
FORMULA 
In order for the ground state to be normalizable, some constraints must
be put on the parameters FORMULA  and FORMULA .
First of all, the normalization condition is somewhat different in the
case of indefinite metric quantization. The condition is
FORMULA 
where we have omitted the sum (integration) over the FORMULA 's.
The ground state wave function given above is just
FORMULA . Therefore, due to the
existence of FORMULA  which flips the sign of FORMULA , the normalization
condition for the ground state wave function is written as
FORMULA 
Now we can write down the sufficient condition for
this Gaussian type integral to converge.
Since the quantity
FORMULA 
is always positive, the condition for normalizability
reduces to the following
FORMULA 
The condition FORMULA  is equivalent to the
condition FORMULA . In order to fulfill the other
conditions the parameter pair FORMULA  has to be
in some range. In Figure (REF ),
the function
FORMULA  is plotted
as a function of FORMULA  for some values of FORMULA . Since this
combination is symmetric with respect to the change FORMULA , it is sufficient to study
the behavior in the parameter range FORMULA .
FIGURE 
It is seen from this figure that for any value of the parameter FORMULA , there
exists a critical value FORMULA  below which the
ground state normalizability is preserved. In
Figure (REF ), this function is plotted in
the whole range FORMULA . As a result, if we restrict
the angle FORMULA  to be less than about FORMULA , the ground
state wave function is normalizable for all values of FORMULA .
FIGURE 
It is useful to have the expression of FORMULA  in terms of the
creation and annihilation operators:
FORMULA 
This concludes our discussion of the higher derivative oscillator.
Note that, if we have an extra term FORMULA  in the starting
Lagrangian, then our Hamiltonian would consist of two parts,
FORMULA , where FORMULA  is just the oscillator Hamiltonian
discussed above and FORMULA  with FORMULA  given by
Equation (REF ) . Thus, the oscillator
gives us a good starting point
for perturbation theory.

 Euclidean Path Integral 
Now let us evaluate the partition function of the
higher derivative theory defined by
FORMULA 
where the summation is over all states FORMULA 
such that they are complete:
FORMULA 
One convenient choice for the states is FORMULA .
Then one can make use of the derivative forms of the momentum
operators and derive a path integral form for the partition
function, just like in the usual theory. First one
has to slice the Euclidean time FORMULA  into small intervals and, then,
the partition function is written in terms of the integration
of the intermediate positions. This path integral form of
the partition function is exactly the
Euclidean path integral that one would naively write down
when not concerned with the canonical quantization
procedure {{cite:97b2b3af-ae5e-42c8-95dd-f7f208a98fc7}}, {{cite:72f630b8-cf58-43b1-90f6-0f1baa260b22}}
FORMULA 
The Euclidean propagator of the variable FORMULA 
can be found by differentiating the partition functional
with respect to the external source FORMULA . In Fourier
space, it is given by
FORMULA 
The multiple pole structure in the propagator is a manifestation of
the spectrum of the theory. As can be seen clearly, the poles are
located exactly at three types of energy gaps of the theory.
There is a big difference here in the
higher derivative theory as compared with the usual theory.
The Minkowski path integral {{cite:880d3c85-1c6f-4c5c-a6b1-52edbc7e73ff}}, {{cite:5732c5d3-e071-4cd7-83c3-971f31b586f4}}
is not well defined. In fact, due
to the complex ghost energy, it has runaway modes at large
temporal separation. Also,
we cannot do a wick rotation from the Euclidean to the Minkowski
because of the complex ghost pole on the first sheet.
We should emphasize that the Euclidean path integral
is still well defined. This is the object that we will
be using in our numerical simulation of the theory.
Also, the Euclidean path integral in principle contains all
the information about the higher derivative theory.
By measuring the Euclidean propagator of the theory, one can
extract the energy excitations of the higher derivative theory
and, hence, the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian.

Higher Derivative Free Field Theory
Having discussed the quantum mechanical oscillator,
let us now turn
to the simplest higher derivative field theory,
free field theory.
Since most of the procedures are quite similar to the
quantum mechanical case, we will be very brief in this section.
Consider the one component higher derivative scalar field theory
parametrized by the
Lagrangian
FORMULA 
where the FORMULA  is the Minkowski d'Alambert operator.
The Hamiltonian density can be obtained in the same way as in
the quantum mechanical example
FORMULA 
Again, we can interchange the role of FORMULA  and FORMULA , which
amounts to FORMULA  and
FORMULA  .
We also impose negative metric on FORMULA  and FORMULA  by doing the
substitution FORMULA  and
FORMULA  , and after these changes our Hamiltonian density
is,
FORMULA 
Negative metric quantization then corresponds to making FORMULA  and FORMULA  hermitian operators. Then the
Hamiltonian itself is not hermitian but still self-adjoint
with respect to the negative metric FORMULA  which flips the
sign of FORMULA  and FORMULA . We have
FORMULA 
Introducing the Fourier modes
FORMULA 
where the index FORMULA  runs from 1 to 3.
We can also write the similar expression for  FORMULA
FORMULA 
To ensure basic commutation relations, we must have
FORMULA 
We can then write the Hamiltonian as
FORMULA 
After some rescaling of the variables
we can bring the Hamiltonian into similar form as in the
quantum mechanical oscillator case
FORMULA 
We then perform the same “rotation” transformation
as in the oscillator case, and then the above Hamiltonian is
diaganolized to
FORMULA 
where the frequency
FORMULA ,
FORMULA  and
FORMULA .
The creation and annihilation operators are given by
FORMULA 
with FORMULA . The Hamiltonian finally looks like
FORMULA 
where the summation is over all the momentum modes and
three types of excitations. The
creation and annihilation operators have the standard
commutation relations
FORMULA 
Similarly, the field FORMULA  can be expressed as a linear combination
of the creation and annihilation operators which will be
given explicitly in the next section. The particle contents of this
free Hamiltonian is now clear. One has three types of excitations for
each three-momentum FORMULA . The operator
FORMULA 
creates an ordinary particle of mass FORMULA , momentum FORMULA  and
energy FORMULA .
The operator
FORMULA 
creates a ghost particle of mass FORMULA , momentum FORMULA  and
energy FORMULA .
The operator
FORMULA 
creates an antighost particle.

Higher Derivative FORMULA  Model in the Symmetric Phase
The higher derivative field theory can be easily generalized
to an FORMULA -symmetric scalar field theory with a quartic coupling.
In the symmetric phase it is convenient to parametrize the Lagrangian
as
FORMULA 
The Hamiltonian of the theory,
after indefinite metric quantization, can be expressed in terms of
creation and annihilation operators, FORMULA ,
where the free part of the Hamiltonian
is given by Equation (REF ).
The interaction part of the Hamiltonian is the conventional one, namely
FORMULA ,
where the field FORMULA  can be written as a linear combination
of the creation and annihilation operators,
FORMULA 
where the
values for FORMULA  are given by the following list:
FORMULA 
The negative metric is seen from the
adjoint relations among the creation and annihilation operators
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the metric operator satisfying FORMULA  and
FORMULA . It is clear that the
Hamiltonian itself is self-adjoint with respect to the metric FORMULA , i.e.
FORMULA .

Higher Derivative FORMULA  Model in the Broken Phase
One starts with the general higher derivative Lagrangian which
has a global FORMULA  symmetry
FORMULA 
where FORMULA 
is the Minkowski space d'Alambert operator and
the coefficients are parametrized as
FORMULA 
After the usual steps of indefinite metric quantization, the
Hamiltonian has the form
FORMULA 
The corresponding FORMULA  generators are given by
FORMULA 
which obviously commute with the Hamiltonian.
Next, the Fourier modes are introduced for each variable
FORMULA 
The Hamiltonian is brought into the following form:
FORMULA 
We will single out the direction of the FORMULA  variable
and fix it in some direction in the FORMULA  space.
This treatment is only valid in the limit of infinite volume.
Strictly speaking, in a finite volume, the symmetry is not
broken. Therefore, the description of symmetry breaking in the finite
volume needs more careful study. As we will show in Chapter (),
in a very large but finite volume, one can apply the adiabatic
approximation (or Born-Oppenheimer Approximation)
to the direction of the zeromode.
We find that the direction of the zeromode rotates very slowly and
decouples from the other modes in the theory.
Therefore, if the volume is very large,
it is legitimate to assume that the direction of the
zeromode is frozen in the FORMULA  space.
With this in mind, we can then decompose
FORMULA 
and similarly for the FORMULA  and FORMULA  variables.
The value of FORMULA  is set to FORMULA .
The Hamiltonian is then written as sum of three types of
terms:
FORMULA 
where FORMULA .
We will examine each piece separately.
The FORMULA  piece can be diagonalized the same way
as in section (). The interaction piece is also
expressed as the creation and annihilation operators through
the field variables. The FORMULA  piece is the only one that
is new in the broken phase. For convenience we use the rescaled
variables given by
FORMULA 
and express the radial variables FORMULA  as
FORMULA 
The derivatives for the FORMULA  are now substituted by
FORMULA 
where the index FORMULA  runs from 1 to FORMULA .
We have assumed that the volume is practically infinite and
the direction FORMULA  is really a constant unit vector in
FORMULA  space. As we will see in Chapter (), this is
only approximately true in a finite volume.
Use the following identity
FORMULA 
FORMULA  is further decomposed into
two parts
FORMULA 
The longitudinal part has the same form as the simple oscillator
and can be easily diagonalized. The transverse part FORMULA  can also be
diagonalized with the transformation
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is a two by two matrix
FORMULA 
The angle FORMULA  is the complex phase of the
Goldstone ghost mass parameter
FORMULA , which is given by
FORMULA 
The transverse part of the Hamiltonian is then diagonalized to
FORMULA 
where the summation of FORMULA  is from 1 to FORMULA  and the
energy gap is FORMULA  and
FORMULA .
In terms of these operators we can write out the explicit
form of  FORMULA
FORMULA 
where the polarization factor FORMULA  is given by
FORMULA .
To summarize, in the broken phase we would have the following
Hamiltonian
FORMULA 
The
index FORMULA  takes the value FORMULA  and FORMULA  respectively. All the
operators can be expressed in terms of the creation and annihilation
operators as
FORMULA 
where the form factors FORMULA  are given by the following
table
FORMULA 
The creation and annihilation operators enjoy the following
commutation relations
FORMULA 

 Unitarity and Large FORMULA  Expansion 

Lippmann-Schwinger Equation And Unitarity
In this section, we will try to answer one of the most important
questions about higher derivative theories, namely, the unitarity
problem {{cite:44d54053-9316-4847-87b0-9d6beff62288}}, {{cite:c7833275-f362-4a39-a040-8680a0a59344}}, {{cite:8ca7cc54-4bb8-40dc-9ff2-35df8b1ec5b0}}, {{cite:a78acd77-e41f-41ce-a841-48e654e18f74}}, {{cite:0156576b-8ac2-4596-a648-968f6cae9e07}}.
In the first part of the discussion,
we will set up the general formalism of scattering
matrix in the higher derivative theory and argue that the
FORMULA -matrix defined within the
physical subspace can be made unitary.
In the second part, we will present
a concrete example of the unitary scattering amplitude in the
large FORMULA  limit of the FORMULA  model which involves the ghost
states as intermediate states.
General Formalism and Unitarity
Let us imagine that our Hilbert space is built up by all the states
generated from the vacuum by successive operations of creation operators
as described in Chapter ().
Some states will have negative norm and complex energy
components. We assume that
all states available to build the initial state
contain only real
energy components of the free Hamiltonian in all Lorentz frames
{{cite:c7833275-f362-4a39-a040-8680a0a59344}}. We will call these states “normal states” or
“physical states”. Denote
the eigenstate of the free Hamiltonian by FORMULA  such that
FORMULA 
Then one can construct two states, denoted as FORMULA  and FORMULA ,
from the Lippmann-Schwinger equation
FORMULA 
It is then easy to show that the states FORMULA  are eigenstates of
the full Hamiltonian with corresponding energy FORMULA . If we now form
wavepackets from these states, one can see that they correspond to
incoming and outgoing waves in the past or future. Therefore, they give us
a good description of the scattering process. We can rewrite the
above equation as
FORMULA 
In this form, it is clear that only energy conserving components of
FORMULA  survive the scattering since, if the components are of different
energy, they will make the operator FORMULA  nonsingular in the FORMULA 
goes to zero limit, hence are killed by the FORMULA  in front. The FORMULA -
matrix between any two normal states FORMULA  and FORMULA  is then
defined to be
FORMULA 
Using the perturbative expansion of the Green's function one can show
that the FORMULA -matrix element defined above is related to the so called
FORMULA -matrix (or FORMULA -matrix) element by
FORMULA 
To show unitarity, we write the Lippmann-Schwinger equation in a
special way
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  and
FORMULA  are called wave operators.
Using the adjointness of the Hamiltonian we see that
FORMULA 
From these two relations we can see that
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the complex energy projector for the free Hamiltonian.
Let us now consider the sum
FORMULA 
where, in the second step, we have inserted
the complete set of the full Hamiltonian.
This establishes the unitarity of the FORMULA -matrix.
The above proof looks very formal.
To clearly understand the role of the ghost states in
the theory let us calculate some scattering processes
in the higher derivative FORMULA  model.

Large-FORMULA  Scattering Amplitude of FORMULA  Model
The basic formula is the perturbation expansion of the FORMULA -matrix given
by Equation (REF ) .
We will consider the large-FORMULA  limit of the geometric
resummation of the FORMULA -channel bubble diagram. We will show how the
modified Feynman Rules arise naturally from this calculation.
First, we calculate the FORMULA -matrix elements to second order
in bare perturbation
theory of the higher derivative FORMULA  theory in the broken phase.
The final large FORMULA  scattering amplitude can then be formed
from the geometric resummation of the bubbles and the
large FORMULA  Higgs propagator.
The calculation in the symmetric phase is quite similar.
We will parametrize the FORMULA -matrix elements as
FORMULA 
where the amplitude FORMULA  is the Feynman amplitude.
The lowest order is trivial namely
FORMULA 
To the second order, we have to consider the intermediate states
contributions and, in the large-FORMULA  limit, this reduces to only
FORMULA -channel scattering. This leads us to the study of the
following one loop contribution,
FORMULA 
in which two types of intermediate states are included, one has
energy FORMULA , the other has energy
FORMULA .
This form can be brought into the usual loop integral form by using the
identity
FORMULA 
where the complex contour is a contour that separates FORMULA  and
FORMULA  from FORMULA  and FORMULA  as
shown in Figure (REF ).
FIGURE 
However, this type of contour could have some pinching problem
{{cite:c7833275-f362-4a39-a040-8680a0a59344}}, {{cite:8ca7cc54-4bb8-40dc-9ff2-35df8b1ec5b0}}.
The problem only occurs for the
ghost and antighost pair contribution in
the above equation, i.e. FORMULA .
In order to see how the potential pinching problem occurs,
we have shown
the movement of the poles in the complex
FORMULA  plane as the center of mass energy increases
in Figure (REF )
The appropriate contour before the pinching is also shown.
It is easy to see that if the center of mass energy FORMULA  is
less than the so called ghost antighost threshold
FORMULA , there is no pinching
and the contour is well defined. As the center of mass energy
increases, four of the eight poles move to the right and
two of them pinch with FORMULA  and FORMULA .
One then has to specify how to deform the contour in
the case of pinching.
FIGURE 
This type of contour deformation
in the presence of possible pinching was also discussed before by
Cutkosky et al. {{cite:8ca7cc54-4bb8-40dc-9ff2-35df8b1ec5b0}}.
They started directly from the integral representation
and tried to define a contour when the ghost and antighost
masses are not exactly complex conjugate of each other, namely
FORMULA , where FORMULA  is some small parameter.
Then, for every nonvanishing FORMULA , they were able to find
a suitable contour. The final result is defined to be the limit
where FORMULA .
The corresponding contour is shown in Figure (REF ).
FIGURE 
This prescription has a disadvantage that it is
not justified with any theoretical consideration.
In fact, the Cutkosky prescription is only one of the many ways
to analyticly continue the integral (REF ).
To specify the “right” analytic continuation, one would need
some input from the Hamiltonian description of the theory.
We have started from the Hamiltonian picture of
the theory, so the Hamiltonian should tell us how to
define our contour. Note that pinching only occurs when
the FORMULA  prescription is not applied to the integral.
With the
FORMULA , however, the pinching is avoided for real value of FORMULA  and
we can always find a suitable contour. This contour is shown
in Figure (REF ). It is clear that our contour differs
from the one discussed by Cutkosky et al. and therefore, our final
result is different from theirs.
Now the Feynman amplitude can be expressed as
FORMULA 
This amplitude represents the Feynman diagram as shown
in Figure (REF ).
FIGURE 
We can shift the integration variable FORMULA  and
after a Wick rotation we can perform the FORMULA  integral.
The integral
itself is finite due to the modification of the propagator at large
momentum and we are left with an integral with Feynman parameter only
FORMULA 
It is very interesting to study the imaginary part of the bubble
integral. The imaginary part comes only from the angular part of the
argument in the logarithm. The function being quadratic in FORMULA  has two
roots in the complex FORMULA  plane which are given by
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  and FORMULA  can take values of three different
masses in the theory. The most important combination is when both are
Goldstone particles. Then, for FORMULA , we have two conjugate roots whose
real part is exactly FORMULA , therefore, just by symmetry, there is no
imaginary part contribution from this term. This corresponds to the case
that the center of mass energy is less than the threshold. Due to the
massless Goldstone, the lowest threshold is at zero energy. However, when
FORMULA  two roots are real and the imaginary part develops,
we have
FORMULA 
In fact one can show, just from the symmetric form
of the integral, that this is the only imaginary part
contribution to the diagram!
For example the imaginary part from the
mass pair FORMULA  and FORMULA  exactly cancels the imaginary part from the
mass pair FORMULA  and FORMULA  and so on. In the large-FORMULA  limit
the scattering amplitude is obtained by summing the geometric
chain of the bubbles and the tree contribution from the
intermediate Higgs state
FORMULA 
Taking the imaginary part of this equation, we get the Optical
Theorem in the large-FORMULA  limit
FORMULA 
The bubble integral can be exactly worked out. It is a function with
rather complicated analytic structure.
The detailed discussion is listed in the appendix.
The scattering amplitude
is obtained by taking FORMULA  on the physical sheet.
It is interesting to study the Goldstone-Goldstone scattering cross
section in the large-FORMULA  limit.
FIGURE 
In Figure (REF ) we plotted the cross section
as a function of FORMULA  in Goldstone ghost mass unit. Here the
Goldstone ghost pair has a complex phase of FORMULA  and the peak
corresponds to the Higgs pole on the second sheet. It is amazing
that the ghost pair is so well-hidden in the tail of the cross section
that it would be very difficult
for experimentalists to determine that there is a ghost pair
hidden somewhere. Also plotted in Figure (REF )
is the scattering phase shift
as a function of center of mass energy. We see that the
phase shift starts out increasing with FORMULA  , and at the Higgs pole
it has a sharp rise. If the Higgs particle were infinitely
narrow then the rise would be exactly FORMULA . Due to the finiteness of
its width and the Goldstone background, the cross section differs from the
description of Breit-Wigner shape. What is
“unusual” about this theory is that the phase shift decreases as the
energy gets through the real part of the ghost mass. This is an
indication of possible acausal behavior in the
scattering, because the sign of FORMULA 
determines the relative phase of the scattered wave to the incident
wave. Although for the scattering by a repulsive
potential in the usual theory, this quantity can also be
negative, it would become acausal if this quantity becomes too large,
that is, a sharp drop of FORMULA  with respect to FORMULA .
In the ordinary theory, this can never happen.
In the higher derivative theory with the ghost
pair, it could happen if the ghost pair is sufficiently close to the
real axis. It had been argued long ago
by T. D. Lee {{cite:c7833275-f362-4a39-a040-8680a0a59344}} that, even in this case, such acausal
behavior would only occur at microscopic scale
typical of the Compton wave length of the ghost, and it will not lead to
macroscopic disasters.
In fact, this violation of microscopic causality
is barely visible experimentally.

 Large FORMULA  Expansion of the Higher Derivative FORMULA  Model
The higher derivative FORMULA  model can be studied in the
large FORMULA  limit. Many aspects of the theory can be illustrated
in the large FORMULA  expansion {{cite:000dd28b-baad-4729-b31a-ca2339f57531}}, {{cite:5e17856d-5ccc-4da6-b7af-6c7a8b5af030}}.
The general formalism for the large
FORMULA  expansion has been previously studied {{cite:2f5ce1c8-f02a-4476-acd9-b340ea358955}}, {{cite:cef24bf5-71c3-4aa3-82dd-f9d62778c33a}}.
Let us briefly
review the main ideas and focus on its application to the higher
derivative FORMULA  model, and also emphasize the comparison of the
higher derivative FORMULA  model with the conventional FORMULA  model within
the large FORMULA  approximation.
The Hamiltonian picture that originates from the quantization was
discussed in the last section, so we will
only consider the Euclidean version of the large FORMULA 
approximation here.
 General Formalism 
Consider the partition function of the theory as expressed by the
following Euclidean path integral
FORMULA 
where the field FORMULA  is an FORMULA  field and the function
FORMULA  is a polynomial function of the operator
FORMULA  of the form
FORMULA 
For example, our choice of the Pauli-Villars theory corresponds to
the form of FORMULA .
To perform the large FORMULA  expansion, it is convenient to introduce the
auxiliary fields FORMULA  such that the path integral is rewritten in the
following form
FORMULA 
The effective potential can then be worked out in a standard fashion
FORMULA 
where the variable FORMULA  is a function of FORMULA 
determined from the gap equation
FORMULA 
The vacuum can be found from the derivative of the above effective
potential. Due to the gap equation, the derivative has the following
form
FORMULA 
Therefore there could be two phases of the theory. One with
FORMULA  , which is the symmetric
phase; the other one has
FORMULA  , which is the broken phase.
In the broken phase, the vacuum expectation value is obtained via
FORMULA 
Note that unlike the conventional theory, the integral in the above
equation is finite as long as we have take the highest momentum power
in the propagator to be greater or equal to 6.
The critical phase transition line is obtained by setting FORMULA  to
zero in the above equation, i.e.
FORMULA 
As we will see in Chapter (), the large FORMULA  prediction
of the critical line is in very good agreement with the simulation.
We can work out the propagator of the fields in the large
FORMULA  approximation. If we are in the symmetric phase, the leading order
correction to the propagator is just from the mass renormalization.
Therefore, we have
FORMULA 
In the broken phase, the Goldstone
propagator remains unchanged to the leading order but the longitudinal
Higgs propagator is modified by the bubble summation of the Goldstone
intermediate states. Thus, we have
FORMULA 
The scattering amplitude can be worked out in both the symmetric and
broken phase. In the symmetric phase,
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is related to the bare mass parameter
FORMULA  according to Equation (REF ).
If we define the scattering amplitude at FORMULA  to be
FORMULA , we can express the above equation
in terms of the renormalized coupling constant  FORMULA
FORMULA 
In the broken phase, we have
FORMULA 
Note that although we are dealing with the Euclidean
scattering amplitude here in
large FORMULA , it should be understood as the amplitude arising from the
Hamiltonian formalism described in the previous section.
As long as the correct complex contour integration is implemented,
and the analytic properties of these amplitudes are understood,
the Euclidean amplitude will also give us the correct physical picture.
We can also modify the above formalism to the theory
on the lattice in a finite volume. All we have to do is to change the
integral into finite lattice summations.
Let us now show some examples of the application of the large FORMULA 
results and see what we can learn from it.

 Renormalized Coupling Constant in the Symmetric Phase
In the first example, we compare the higher derivative FORMULA 
model on the lattice and the conventional FORMULA  model on the lattice
in the symmetric phase. As described in Equation (REF ), the
renormalized coupling constant FORMULA  can be defined as
FORMULA 
where everything is measured in lattice unit.
In this formula, the factor FORMULA  is the exact
group theory factor. However, in the naive large FORMULA  approximation,
we should use FORMULA  instead of FORMULA . When we apply this to
the FORMULA  model, this makes a factor of 3 difference.
We therefore have to conclude that the leading order large
FORMULA  results are ambiguous when applied to FORMULA .
As we will see in the next example, similar situation
occurs for the broken phase.
We can calculate this
renormalized coupling constant at
the same correlation length FORMULA  in the conventional FORMULA  model
and in the Pauli-Villars theory, with some fixed
value of FORMULA , for every value of the bare coupling constant
FIGURE 
FORMULA . The magnitude of this quantity reflects the strength of
the interaction in the symmetric phase.
In Figure (REF ) , the comparison
between the two theories is shown for FORMULA  for every given
FORMULA . The lattice summation is calculated on a FORMULA  lattice
with the naive lattice discretization of the Laplacian.
The continuum Pauli-Villars result is also shown in the figure.
For this choice of the correlation length, the lattice effects are
rather small in both theories. It is clear that
the Pauli-Villars theory has stronger interaction,
about a factor of 4, for the same
correlation length when compared with the conventional FORMULA  model.
As mentioned above, the large FORMULA  expansion has its own ambiguities,
so we do not anticipate this large FORMULA  result to give us a precise
quantitative description of the theory. However, we do expect that the
increase of the coupling constant in the Pauli-Villars theory
relative to the conventional theory should also be present
in the full theory. Similar
results in the broken phase also support this picture,
as we will see in the next subsection.

Higgs Mass and Width for Conventional FORMULA  Model 
Now, we will examine the situation in the broken phase of the theory.
We will first briefly review the large FORMULA  result for the conventional
FORMULA  model with a hypercubic lattice regulator {{cite:2f5ce1c8-f02a-4476-acd9-b340ea358955}}, {{cite:cef24bf5-71c3-4aa3-82dd-f9d62778c33a}} in
the broken phase. The large FORMULA  Goldstone propagator will remain the
free propagator in the leading order of FORMULA  expansion, but the
large FORMULA  Higgs propagator will be
FORMULA 
In general, the lattice bubble is a very
complicated function of FORMULA . However in the
limit of small FORMULA , which is the regime of
physical interests, it has been worked out and has the following
asymptotic expression {{cite:552e040a-1c54-4002-9f56-fcebeb020db5}}
FORMULA 
where the constant FORMULA  for the hypercubic lattice.
We can now use this relation to find the complex pole to the Higgs
propagator. Since the higher order terms are
neglected in the bubble, it is sufficient to keep
only the leading term in the lattice momentum.
Setting FORMULA , we have (taking the
second Rieman sheet value for the logarithm)
FORMULA 
The phase FORMULA  is first determined from the second equation
and then substituted into the first one to get the real and
imaginary part of the Higgs pole.
FIGURE 
The result is summarized in Figure (REF ) . For the Higgs
correlation length of about 2, the ratio FORMULA  is only about
3. The correlation length 2 is chosen because if the Higgs is
too heavy in lattice units, the lattice effects would become
significant and the theory would no longer
describe continuum physics {{cite:552e040a-1c54-4002-9f56-fcebeb020db5}}.
Another feature that we can study is the width of the Higgs particle.
There has been quite a lot of confusion even with the conventional
FORMULA  model. The large FORMULA  width of the FORMULA  model was first
carefully studied by Einhorn using a sharp momentum cutoff {{cite:cef24bf5-71c3-4aa3-82dd-f9d62778c33a}}.
He found that the large FORMULA  formula, if FORMULA  is substituted in,
gives too large a width (40 percent larger) when compared
with the perturbation theory of the FORMULA  model.
Therefore, the large FORMULA  results seem to indicate
that the theory is more strongly interacting than the perturbative
predictions. Some authors interpret this finding
as genuine nonperturbative effects of the model {{cite:2f5ce1c8-f02a-4476-acd9-b340ea358955}}.
However, we do not think this is true for the following
two reasons. First of all, the large FORMULA  result of the width does not
agree with perturbation theory, even for very weak couplings. In this
regime, the next to leading term of the width has been calculated in
perturbation theory. The correction is very small, typically of the
order of one percent. Therefore, it is unlikely that even higher order
terms will change this perturbative result significantly. Secondly, the
perturbative result has been proven to be correct by extensive
nonperturbative Monte Carlo simulation studies. No mysterious
nonperturbative effects as predicted by large FORMULA  have been found.
We believe this discrepancy is because of the ambiguity
within the large FORMULA  framework. The large FORMULA 
result can only be accurate to about 20 to 30 percent because of the
large subleading FORMULA  terms at FORMULA . After all, FORMULA  is too
far from FORMULA . This has been previously pointed out by
Kuti, et. al. {{cite:afea5a49-1abb-48a4-8f41-740fcba2720d}}.
More importantly, we have over
estimated the decay channel of the Higgs particle
in the naive large FORMULA  formula.
At FORMULA , the Higgs particle can decay into 3 colors of the Goldstone
pairs while the large FORMULA  formula counts 4. When we take this into
account and substitute FORMULA  for FORMULA  in the large FORMULA  formula,
we expect compatible results with the perturbation theory.
FIGURE 
In Figure (REF ),
we have plotted the two large FORMULA  results of the width
as a function of the Higgs mass and compared them with the
perturbative results. As expected, the corrected large FORMULA  width
agrees reasonably well with the perturbative predictions, especially
in the weakly interacting region or small Higgs mass. The naive large
FORMULA  result, however, overshoots by about 30 to 40 percent simply
because it
fails to identify the correct number of decay channels of the Higgs
particle. From this calculation, we conclude that the large FORMULA 
approximation has its own ambiguities when it is applied to
FORMULA  values that are not very large. Therefore, one must modify the naive
large FORMULA  formula in order to get meaningful quantitative results.

 Higgs Mass and Width for Higher Derivative FORMULA  Model 
In higher derivative theory, things are getting more
complex because of the ghost pair.
One could try to evaluate the continuum bubble integral in
Equation (REF ) and solve for the complex pole
of the Higgs propagator. Note that this integral is
finite and no regulator has to be introduced.
FIGURE 
The precise form of the bubble integral
is very complicated and is listed in the Appendix of this chapter.
The analytic structure ( Riemann sheets and cuts ) are also
quite complex, as described in the Appendix.
The resulting function is then substituted into the full large
FORMULA  Higgs propagator to solve for the poles. The complex pole structure of
the function is also very complicated due to the existence of the
ghost states.
The poles
are numerically searched for a given parameter FORMULA  in FORMULA  unit
and a fixed value of the bare coupling constant FORMULA .
The result is shown in Figure (REF ).
One has to be careful with the Riemann sheet
structure of the function in order to get the right result.
The poles are characterized by their positions on the Riemann sheets. On
the first Riemann sheet, due to the ghost states, one finds a conjugate
pair of poles represented by the open hexagonal points in the figure.
They are moving towards the higher energy values as the interaction is
turned on. These complex conjugate ghost pairs have
“shadow images” on the second Riemann
sheet which are represented by the filled hexagonal points. Because
of the interaction with the Higgs pole on the second sheet, these poles
are not moving symmetrically. The conventional Higgs poles are
on the second Riemann sheet, represented by the filled circles. As the
vacuum expectation value
is increases in FORMULA  unit, the Higgs pole is moving
towards the higher energy range. When the Higgs pole is at very low
energy and far away from the ghost poles, the effects of the ghost
states can be viewed as an effective cutoff to the conventional theory.
This can also be seen in Equation (REF ). When FORMULA  is
small, the bubble integral becomes very simple and can be very well
approximated by
FORMULA 
But, if the Higgs pole is getting closer to the energy scale of
the ghost poles, the higher
derivative theory feature has great importance and viewing the ghosts as
the effective cutoff to the conventional theory becomes meaningless.
Identifying the real part of the Higgs pole with the mass parameter
and the imaginary part with the half width, we can plot the ratio
FORMULA  as a function of the bare coupling constant, which is shown
in Figure (REF ).
FIGURE 
In this figure, we have selected 4 different vev
values and the ratio saturates to about 4 when the bare coupling
constant is brought to infinity. When we set the physical value of the
vacuum expectation value to 250 GeV, this implies a Higgs particle
with the mass FORMULA  TeV.
This should be compared with the result of the conventional FORMULA  model
discussed earlier in Figure (REF ).
Although the absolute values of the
Higgs mass may be somewhat ambiguous due to the large FORMULA 
approximation,
this result indicates there is a 30 percent relative increase in
the Higgs mass over vev ratio when the Pauli-Villars theory is
compared with the conventional FORMULA  model on the hypercubic lattice.
So we would expect the full Pauli-Villars theory should also
generate a larger FORMULA  ratio compared with the conventional
theory. Recall that the Higgs mass bound for the conventional
theory is about 750 GeV (which is a ratio of 3), we
expect the Pauli-Villars theory could have a heavy Higgs particle
in the TeV range. In fact, this hint from the large
FORMULA  expansion initiated our nonperturbative study of the
Pauli-Villars theory {{cite:000dd28b-baad-4729-b31a-ca2339f57531}}.
As we will see in the coming chapters, this
scenario of strongly interacting Higgs sector in the Pauli-Villars
theory is confirmed by our nonperturbative simulation results.
We can plot the width of the Higgs particle as a function
of the Higgs mass, just as we did for the conventional theory.
FIGURE 
In Figure (REF ),
the similar plot for the higher derivative
Pauli-Villars
theory is shown. One has to again
modify the naive large FORMULA  results for
the right decay channels. At very low energy, this result agrees with
the perturbative result, which means that the theory can be viewed as
a Pauli-Villars regulated conventional theory. However, when the
Higgs mass is getting heavier, it deviates quite rapidly from the perturbative
result, and in this range, the higher derivative theory
does not resemble a regulated conventional theory.

 Perturbation Theory of the Higher Derivative FORMULA  Model
The renormalized perturbation theory of the higher derivative
scalar FORMULA  model can be established in the usual way, except we
pay special attention to the role
of the ghost pair. In the low energy regime, we expect to
recover the conventional theory. When the energy scale is increased,
one should see the ghost pair begins to play a more important role.
To incorporate this energy dependence, a mass dependent renormalization
scheme is needed. We now illustrate this briefly by considering the model
in the broken phase.
 Lagrangian and Renormalization Conditions 
Let us consider the following Euclidean Lagrangian,
FORMULA 
We can define the bare fields and bare parameters according to
FORMULA 
Then, the total Lagrangian can be written as
FORMULA 
In the broken phase, it is convenient to separate the Higgs field and
the Goldstone fields as
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the renormalized vev. We can then
write down various propagators to one loop order and impose the
following mass dependent renormalization conditions,
FORMULA 
Notice that the above renormalization conditions uniquely determines the
four renormalized parameters. The arbitrary scale FORMULA  is introduced
to avoid the infrared divergences. All the renormalized parameters will
depend on this running scale through the above definitions. It is easy
to fix the counter terms according to the above equations,
FORMULA 
where the bubble integrals FORMULA ,FORMULA ,
,FORMULA  and the tadpoles FORMULA ,FORMULA  are listed
below:
FORMULA 

 One-loop Mass-dependent Beta-functions 
Now we can work out the one loop mass dependent FORMULA -function of
the theory, which is obtained by noticing that the bare coupling
constant FORMULA  does not depend on the renormalization scale
FORMULA . The result can be written in the following form,
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  and the
mass parameters FORMULA , FORMULA  and their
corresponding residues are determined from the following decomposition:
FORMULA 
The important feature of these coeffecients is
FORMULA 
Now it is easy to see how the effective coupling constant evolve with the
energy scale FORMULA . When FORMULA  is very small, the ghost pair
contributions to the beta-function is negligible. The summation in the
beta-function reduces to only the FORMULA  contribution, which is the
conventional, well-known beta-function of the FORMULA  model in the broken
phase. As FORMULA  increases, the ghost contributions become
increasingly important. When the energy scale is well above the ghost scale,
the integral in the beta-function reduces to 1 and the quantity in the
bracket vanishes due to Equation (REF ). This means that, at
high energies, beta-function of the theory vanishes. Therefore, as
the energy scale increases, the
running coupling constant FORMULA  also increases. However, at
the scale of the ghost pair or higher,
the coupling constant gradually flattens out to some finite number.
This is a very different feature when compared with the conventional
FORMULA  model. In the conventional FORMULA  model, the running coupling
constant keeps increasing and becomes divergent at the so-called
Landau ghost energy scale. In our higher derivative theory, we have
replaced the Landau ghost with real ghost pair and the running coupling
constant will remain finite for all energies.

Appendix
In this appendix we list the explicit form of the bubble integral
and discuss some analytic properties of such.
The function is given by the parametric integral representation
FORMULA 
where the sum over FORMULA  and FORMULA  runs from 0 to 2 with the following
values of FORMULA  and  FORMULA
FORMULA 
The integral can be worked out explicitly with the result
FORMULA 
where the last term is the ghost-antighost contribution and
the function FORMULA  is given by
FORMULA 
The logarithm
functions in the above equations take the complex angle between FORMULA 
and FORMULA .
The function FORMULA  was worked out long ago by Lee and
Wick but our results is different from theirs {{cite:c7833275-f362-4a39-a040-8680a0a59344}}.
Their results correspond to
combining the two logarithms in the above equation,
which is not always legitimate
because of the restricted
range of the complex phase of the arguments under the logarithms. The
Rieman sheet structure of this function is highly nontrivial as shown
in Figure (REF ).
FIGURE 
Our function agrees with Lee's function when
FORMULA . The function FORMULA  has a cut which is
a hyperbola whose center is at FORMULA  in the complex
FORMULA  plane. The function FORMULA 
has a finite jump anywhere across the cut
except at FORMULA  where it is continuous.
This function is analytic everywhere else away from the cut.
The so-called “ghost-antighost threshold” is not a real one, and no
imaginary part contribution will arise when the center of mass energy
steps through FORMULA . This is necessary for the unitarity
to hold.
Other parts in the FORMULA  function have cuts starting at the ghost pole
location.
In the small FORMULA  and large FORMULA  region the function FORMULA  simplifies to
FORMULA 
This concludes our discussion of the analytic properties of the
function.

Higher Derivative Field Theories on the Lattice

The Naive Lattice Action and Phase Diagram
The need of a lattice for the higher derivative scalar field theory
presented in the previous chapter is not
for the purpose of regularization, but rather,
to make the degree of freedom finite so that a nonperturbative study
of the model can be performed in computer
simulations. The lattice spacing FORMULA 
introduces a new short distance energy scale with the associated
momentum cutoff FORMULA . In order to recover the higher
derivative field theory in the continuum, we would have to work
towards the FORMULA  limit with a fixed ratio
of FORMULA . The lattice action we choose to study {{cite:4bf1530c-6063-4d10-802d-dc008a5e7f5c}}, {{cite:23782e57-7ea0-4580-96b5-787233617f19}} is
FORMULA 
where the FORMULA  is the lattice Laplace operator. The phase structure
of this lattice model is quite similar to the conventional FORMULA  scalar
field theory. It has two phases as shown in
Figure (REF ). The FORMULA  symmetric phase
FIGURE 
is separated from the broken phase with residual FORMULA  symmetry
by a second order phase transition line for every value of the
lattice coupling constant FORMULA  in the FORMULA  plane.
Near the critical line, we expect to recover the continuum theory
without the lattice artifacts. However, the critical behavior of
our model is more complicated than the conventional FORMULA  model. It can
represent different universal continuum theories along different
paths towards the critical line. Tuning the value of FORMULA  towards
the critical line for any fixed value of FORMULA  corresponds to the
trivial field theory in the continuum. In this limit, the operator
FORMULA  becomes irrelevant in the critical region.
However, if we tune the value of FORMULA  towards the critical line
in such a way that the ratio FORMULA  remains fixed, we will recover
the continuum higher derivative field theory with the corresponding
ratio of the ghost mass parameter and the Higgs mass. In this limit
the operator FORMULA  cannot be viewed as an irrelevant
operator {{cite:3cb44c32-ff25-4760-9ddd-70b4fa2e986b}} in the Lagrangian. Thus,
it becomes clear, from the
discussion above, that if we want to study the higher derivative
field theory, we have to work towards the second limit.
In the practical application, however, this limit is not very
easy to arrange. One reason is that if we want our results
to represent the continuum results, we have to keep the ghost mass
parameter FORMULA  reasonably small in lattice units
in order to get rid of the lattice
effects associated with it. On the other hand, we need to put the
Higgs mass below the ghost mass parameter. Therefore, we are
very restricted in the parameter space. On the one hand, making
the Higgs mass smaller will lead to huge finite size effects for
the practical lattice sizes; on the other hand, making the Higgs mass
larger will push up the ghost mass and will result in large lattice
effects. So we have a rather narrow range in the Pauli-Villars
correlation length FORMULA . Typical values we took in the beginning
of our simulation were: FORMULA , FORMULA .
This, of course, was unsatisfactory because the ratio
FORMULA  is too narrow of a range. If we
view this theory as a Pauli-villars regulated theory, for example, we
would hope to see the conventional scaling behavior in the
large FORMULA  limit. It turns out that the scaling form
may apply only for rather large FORMULA  values which is
impossible for us to investigate using this naive lattice action.
Also, due to this restricted range, it was also impossible for
us to study the scattering phase shift profile of the model.
This type of analysis offers us a very good way of extracting
the mass value for an unstable particle in the finite box ( see
Chapter () for full discussion ).
This restriction in the parameters is purely due to the
introduction of the underlying lattice structure. When
we were able to eliminate most of the lattice effects, we were then
able to enlarge our parameter space quite substantially.
Therefore, the need for an improved lattice action
becomes quite obvious.

 The Improved Lattice Action 
Improving the lattice action so that it has better
Euclidean invariance was studied long ago {{cite:4e791751-e946-4da6-9f65-9149bd7a666f}}. Our choice
of the improvement corresponds to modifying the lattice
Laplacian so that it resembles the continuum
Laplacian. Therefore, we take
FORMULA 
where the coefficients are given by the following table
TABLE 
In fact, we calculated the renormalized coupling constant in the
large FORMULA  limit and we found that this improved action significantly
decreased the lattice effects. With this improved lattice action, even at
FORMULA , there was negligible lattice effects on the large FORMULA 
results. The phase diagram of the improved action is similar to
the naive action.
The improved action offers us another power: the possibility
of performing a phase shift simulation on the higher derivative
FORMULA  model. This is the subject in Chapter ().
As we will demonstrate, without the improved action, we are in the
parameter range that is impossible for this type of simulation because
we would need unrealisticly large lattices to extract the
phase shift. With the improved action, this type of calculation
becomes possible.

 The Rotator States and Born Oppenheimer Approximation 
Studying the higher derivative FORMULA  model in the broken phase and
the corresponding Higgs mass problem requires a better understanding
of the symmetry breaking mechanism in the finite volume. In fact this
is already an important issue in the conventional FORMULA  theory
without the higher derivative terms added.
The symmetry breaking mechanism has been understood very well
in the infinite volume limit. However, it has not been answered
satisfactorily in the FORMULA  model in a finite volume.
There are several complications. First of all, the notion of
symmetry breaking in the infinite volume cannot be applied to
a system in a finite volume. Strictly speaking, in a finite volume,
the symmetry is never broken.
Secondly, it turns out that the dynamics of the zeromode
are crucial for the understanding, and the zeromode
is coupled to other modes in a complicated
way. For the one component FORMULA  theory, Hartree type of
approximation will give us a very good description of the
symmetry breaking. For the FORMULA  model, extra care must
be paid to the motion of the zeromode and new approximation
schemes are needed for the understanding of the problem.
This section consists of several parts.
In the first part, we will review what is known to the
symmetry breaking in a ordinary one-component FORMULA 
theory in the broken phase. It turns out that this is
a very instructive model to study. In the second part,
the conventional FORMULA  model is studied in the broken phase.
Here we introduce the Born-Oppenheimer Approximation (or Adiabatic
Approximation) and fully investigate
the dynamics of the zeromode.
In the third part, we consider some important
applications of the Born-Oppenheimer Approximation.
The machinery is applied to the ground state
and higher energy excited states.
The rotator correction to the energy of these states
is calculated. This will serve as a theoretical guide line to
the analysis of the simulation results in Chapter ().
Then,
the higher derivative FORMULA  theory is presented in the
next section.
 Symmetry Breaking of the One-component FORMULA  Model 
Consider the one component FORMULA  theory in a cubic box. The
Hamiltonian of the theory is given by
FORMULA 
This Hamiltonian is obviously invariant under the
change FORMULA . That is to say
that one can construct a parity operator FORMULA , which
flips the sign of the FORMULA  field and it
commutes with the Hamiltonian. Therefore,
all the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian can be
chosen to have a definite parity.
We can build up two approximate ground states of the
Hamiltonian FORMULA , which are Gaussian wavefunctions centered at
FORMULA  respectively.
This picture is very well illustrated
by the so-called “Hartree approximation”. We start with a trial
wave functional which is a Gaussian
FORMULA 
where FORMULA ,FORMULA  are variational parameters and the summation
over FORMULA  and FORMULA  is implied. The approximate ground state of the
system can be found by using the minimization condition of the
energy. This condition in the broken phase will give us two
solutions for the parameter FORMULA , namely,
FORMULA  and the propagator FORMULA 
is given by
FORMULA 
If we denote these two states as FORMULA  then we see
they satisfy the following properties
FORMULA 
Note that the
states FORMULA  are not orthogonal to
each other in the finite volume.
The true ground state and the first excited state are given by the
symmetric and antisymmetric linear combination of these two
states
FORMULA 
The true ground state is a parity even
state, while the first excited state is a parity odd state.
The energy difference between the two is exponentially
small when the volume is large.
This means that if the
system were started at one of the minimum, after a long enough
time, there is a finite
probability of finding the system
tunneled to the other minimum. The typical time
scale for this is FORMULA , where FORMULA  is the
energy difference between the ground and the first excited state.
If we use a infinite volume, the state
FORMULA  would be exactly orthogonal to the state
FORMULA ; then the system starting from one
particular minimum of the potential as the true vacuum
will stay there, without knowing
the other one and the FORMULA 
symmetry is broken. However, in a
finite but large volume, the system
will stay around one minimum for such a
long enough time that we may say
the symmetry is “almost broken”.
In the one component model, the symmetry is a discrete symmetry
and the Hartree approximation gives us a very good understanding
of the symmetry breaking mechanism in the finite volume.
Nonperturbative works have also been done to measure the
energy gap between the ground state and the first excited
state, which is related to the surface tension of the
system.

FORMULA  Model: General Setup
The situation is much more complicated when we try to do
a similar analysis for the FORMULA  model. The main reason
is that the symmetry is a continuous symmetry, therefore,
the dynamics of the zeromode is much more complicated.
We could first try out the Hartree approximation, but it
will not give us the right energy spectrum of the theory.
This is because the Hartree approximation
treats every mode of the system equally. In
the one component model this is valid, but it is not valid for the
FORMULA  model. In the FORMULA  model there exists one special mode,
that is, the direction of the zero Fourier mode which
can be characterized by an FORMULA  unit vector. In a large but
finite volume, this mode
is a slow varying mode when compared with the other
modes. It is the counter part of the parity operator
in the one component model. The only difference is that,
in the one component
model, the parity only takes discrete values and is not
dynamical. In the O(N) model, however, this unit vector lives on
a FORMULA -sphere and has its own dynamics.
Therefore, we expect that the Born-Oppenheimer
Approximation (BOA), also known as the
Adiabatic Approximation, will give us a very good description
of the zeromode dynamics.
The Born-Oppenheimer Approximation was first introduced
in the study of diatomic molecules. In the molecular
problem, there are two types of degrees of freedom. The motion
of the electron is called “fast”, and the motion of
the nucleus is called “slow”. Therefore, when solving the
energy eigenvalues of the system, one should first nail down
the slow variable, namely the configuration of the
nucleus, and solve the fast variable spectrum. In this step,
the configuration of the slow variable is treated as an
external field. The eigenvalues and eigenstates that
come out will, in general, depend on the prescribed
configuration of the slow variable. These eigenvalues
are then taken back into the Schrödinger equation for
the slow variables as the effective potential, which
reflects the feedback of the fast variable to the
slow variable. Finally, the Schrödinger equation for
the slow variable is solved to get the spectrum of the
molecule.
The spectrum of the molecule has a three fold hierarchy:
electron energy, oscillation energy and rotational energy.
These energy gaps are characterized by different powers of
a small parameter, which is the ratio FORMULA , where
FORMULA  is the mass of the electron and FORMULA  is the mass
of the nucleus. Born-Oppenheimer is a very good
approximation for the molecule, since this ratio is so small.
It is not hard to imagine that a Hartree approximation to the
molecular problem would be a poor choice, since it
treats the electron (fast variable) and the nucleus (slow variable)
equally, while ignoring the enormous difference in the mass of the two.
Similarly, in our application, Hartree is a poor approximation
for the same reason.
To get the right picture, one has to separate the special
zeromode and use the Born-Oppenheimer type of approximation.
In our model, we will treat the direction of the
zeromode as the only slow variable. We will use the
same Born-Oppenheimer type of spirit to solve for
the energy levels of our model.
We begin with the Hamiltonian
FORMULA 
where for convenience we have discretize the system on a
cubic lattice. The operator FORMULA  is just the
derivative operator FORMULA  in the
field variable diagonal representation.
Two classes of symmetry operators that commute with this Hamiltonian are
very important. First, there are
global FORMULA  symmetry generators FORMULA  given by
FORMULA 
We also have the 3-momentum operators  FORMULA
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the unit vector in the FORMULA  direction. It is
trivial to verify that these operators commute with the full
Hamiltonian hence are symmetries of the theory.
We now introduce the Fourier modes of the field variable,
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the 3-volume of the box. As we mentioned
above, the zero mode FORMULA  plays a very important role
in the broken phase. Therefore we have singled out this mode from the
nonzero momentum modes. Let us define:
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the
vev of the theory.
In the Born-Oppenheimer type of
approach, we will treat the direction of FORMULA , namely
FORMULA , as the only
slow varying variable and treat the rest as fast variables.
The justification of this will be seen shortly.
Then the Hamiltonian can be expressed in terms of
these Fourier modes.
We use the radial variables for the mode
FORMULA . Thus we write the wavefunctional of
the system as FORMULA  and the
effective Hamiltonian for FORMULA  will contain only the
second derivative with respect to FORMULA . For the nonzero
Fourier modes, let us introduce the creation and
annihilation operators as
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the higgs excitation.
We can define the Higgs creation and annihilation operators as
FORMULA 
Similarly, we can define the transverse Goldstone creation and
annihilation operators as
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the Goldstone energy.
In terms of these operators, we can rewrite the effective
Hamiltonian in the following form
FORMULA 
where the fields FORMULA  and FORMULA  are given by
FORMULA 
and the constant FORMULA . The operator
FORMULA  is the FORMULA  Casimir of
the zeromode variable.
The above creation and annihilation operators satisfy the following
commutation relations
FORMULA 
It is also very convenient to introduce the following decomposition
for the fields. For a given FORMULA  unit vector FORMULA , we can find
additional FORMULA  unit vectors which, together with FORMULA , form a
complete set in the FORMULA  space. We therefore define
FORMULA 
It is readily checked that these operators satisfy the standard
commutation relations
FORMULA 
Note that due to the leftover FORMULA  symmetry, the determination of
the unit vectors FORMULA  is not unique. However, the physical quantities
will not depend on this ambiguity. Moreover we can calculate the
commutator of the operator FORMULA  with the unit vectors,
FORMULA 
Now we can set up a basis in our Hilbert space from the eigenstate
of the free Hamiltonian. We will also choose the angular momentum
eigenstate of the FORMULA  variable, namely
FORMULA 
where the state FORMULA  is the eigenstate of FORMULA  with eigenvalue
FORMULA . This is just a symbolic notation
of the state. Strictly speaking, for
FORMULA  model, we need more quantum numbers to specify
the state. Note that the oscillator part of the state actually
depends on the unit vector FORMULA  via the definition of the
longitudinal and transverse projection, although
the eigenvalue does not. Therefore, if we were to
act the operator FORMULA  on the states above, it would not only
act on the state FORMULA , but also act on the rest of the components
( except FORMULA , of course, since it is the radial zero
momentum mode ). As we will see below, the Born-Oppenheimer
Approximation will first neglect the effect of FORMULA  on the
fast modes and only consider the slow mode part of the
state, i.e. FORMULA . The next order correction has
to take this into account and the BOA is valid when
the correction is small.
The global FORMULA  generator FORMULA  now can be expressed in terms
of the creation and annihilation operators defined in
Equation (REF )
FORMULA 
where the index FORMULA  and FORMULA  run from 0 to FORMULA .
The operators FORMULA  and the functions FORMULA , FORMULA  are
defined by the following:
FORMULA 
We will need the result of FORMULA  acting on the oscillator
states. Let us consider the object
FORMULA .
This can be easily obtained by noticing that the state is
annihilated by the global FORMULA  generators FORMULA .
Therefore we would induce that
FORMULA 
We will also need the commutation relations between
FORMULA  and the annihilation operators
FORMULA 
or equivalently, in terms of operators FORMULA  and FORMULA ,
we have
FORMULA 
The corresponding commutators with the creation operators
can be obtained from hermitian conjugation of the
above equations. We now have all the tools to study the
rotator energy spectrum.

FORMULA  Model: The Ground States
The full ground state of the free Hamiltonian consists of two
parts. One is the ground state of oscillator states. The other part
is the rotator states.
FORMULA 
Note that, before the rotator energy contributions are taken into
account, the degeneracy of the ground state is infinite, since any
rotator state FORMULA  will belong to the same energy.
It is very easy to check that all these states are eigenstates of
the momentum operator with eigenvalue of 0. They can also be taken
as the eigenstates of the appropriate FORMULA  operators. To see this,
notice that when the operator FORMULA  is applied to the states, it
generally has two contributions. One is from FORMULA  acting on the
oscillator state FORMULA , which is zero in this case; the
other is from FORMULA  acting on the rotator states FORMULA , which
is equivalent to FORMULA . Therefore, we have
FORMULA 
By taking the states FORMULA  to be the eigenstates of the
zeromode Casimir, we also make the ground states to have the
appropriate FORMULA  charges. Basically, the oscillator ground state
has FORMULA  charge 0, and all the FORMULA  charges comes from the
rotator states.
As mentioned above, the leading order ground states are infinitely
degenerate due to the rotator states. This degeneracy is lifted
once the first nonvanishing rotator correction is taken into account.
To do this, let us evaluate the matrix element of the rotator
energy operator FORMULA  among the ground states
FORMULA 
where we have used Equation (REF ). Therefore we get
FORMULA 
As expected, the degeneracy is lifted, and the ground states now
have a degeneracy of FORMULA , for a given FORMULA  value. The second term
in the above equation is an FORMULA  independent constant and can be absorbed
into the definition of the ground state energy. The first term is
FORMULA  dependent and is known as the rotator energy spectrum. This
formula was derived before by Leutwyler using
the rigid rotator approximation in the chiral Lagrangian formalism.
The significance of this energy spectrum in the Monte Carlo simulation
was also discussed {{cite:c2da0f48-bcf7-4cbc-8d62-5506a55d904b}}.
The low energy excitations of the model exhibit a three hierarchy
of energy gaps. The largest energy gap is the mass gap of the Higgs
particle, whose energy is independent of the 3-volume. The second
largest gap is the Goldstone particle, whose energy gap is typically
of order FORMULA , where FORMULA  is the size of the 3 dimensional
cubic box. The smallest gap is the rotator energy differences between
different FORMULA  values, whose energy is of order
FORMULA . In a practical simulation, the size of the Higgs gap
and the Goldstone energy gap are of the same order, since the size of
the box is not large enough. However, the energy gap of the rotator
is usually much smaller compared with the Higgs and Goldstone. Therefore
we expect the Born-Oppenheimer picture should be a very good description
of the theory in the finite box.
It is also possible to evaluate the second order correction to
the ground state energy. Let us first look at the following
quantity
FORMULA 
The first term in the above equation will contribute at the second order
but it is a term independent of FORMULA . If we only focus on the
FORMULA -dependent terms, we can forget about this term. The last term
is diagonal, it will not contribute to the second order correction of
the ground state energy. Therefore, only the second term will give
us FORMULA -dependent contribution to the ground state energy.
The state left over is
FORMULA 
Therefore, it will contribute a second order energy correction that
looks like
FORMULA 
The matrix element that appears in the above equation can be simplified
by noticing
FORMULA 
We can pick our FORMULA  axis such that the unit vector is in the
direction FORMULA . Then the above operator simplifies to
the difference of two Casimirs: the Casimir of the FORMULA  and the
Casimir of the unbroken  FORMULA
FORMULA 
This correction is usually very small for practical simulation
parameters. However, there is another second order correction of the
rotator Hamiltonian. Recall that we can expand the rotator Hamiltonian
into the form
FORMULA 
Note that the operator
FORMULA . therefore we
have a systematic expansion in inverse powers of
the 3-volume. If we introduce the rotator energy
FORMULA , then we have a expansion
in terms of the small quantity FORMULA .
Therefore, there is another contribution from the
operator FORMULA  which is also
of the order of FORMULA . So we have
FORMULA 
The first term basically takes into account the nonrigid effects
of the rotator.

FORMULA  Model: The Zero Momentum Higgs States
Let us consider the energy corrections to the state
FORMULA .
Since the zero momentum Higgs excitation is just the
radial excitation which commute with the angular
variables. Therefore the energy corrections to the state
are very much like the corrections for the ground states.
FORMULA 
The second order correction is down by an extra factor of FORMULA 
compared with the first order correction. However, due
to the large numerical factor in front, the effect of the first term is
still quite significant.
In a practical simulation, the correlation function
FORMULA 
is measured and used as a way of extracting the
vacuum expectation value FORMULA . This correlation
function will pick up the
energy difference of FORMULA  states.
In most of the old simulations on FORMULA , the
ratio FORMULA  is very small and
the rigid approximation of the rotator
energy gives very reliable results. In our
recent simulations on the higher derivative
theories, this ratio is of the order of
10 percent and the correction is noticeable.
We would find the wrong FORMULA  value if we did not
include this correction.

FORMULA  Model: Two Pion States
We can perform the similar calculation for the two pion states. Let us
take the isospin zero channel states
FORMULA . We have
FORMULA 
which implies that relative to the ground state the finite volume
correction is
FORMULA 
This correction is also very small when we extract the two pion
energy. For the simulation points where we extract the two
pion energies, this correction is below 1 percent and is
therefore hidden in the statistical errors.

 Symmetry Breaking of the Higher Derivative FORMULA  Model
The similar analysis can be done with the higher derivative
FORMULA  model. Having discussed the ordinary FORMULA  theory
we will be very brief and only point out the differences.
Many steps are also similar to the quantization of the
higher derivative theory which was discussed in detail in
Chapter ().
One starts with the general higher derivative Lagrangian which
has a global FORMULA  symmetry
FORMULA 
where FORMULA 
is the Minkowski space d'Alambert operator and
the coefficients are parametrized as
FORMULA 
After the usual steps of indefinite metric quantization, and
introduction of the Fourier modes, the
Hamiltonian has the form
( see Equation (REF ) to
Equation (REF ) for detail )
FORMULA 
Because we are now treating the system in a finite volume, we can
no longer neglect the motion of the zeromode. Instead, following
the idea of Born-Oppenheimer Approximation ( or Adiabatic
Approximation ),
we will single out the direction of the FORMULA  variable
and make it the slow variable in our Born-Oppenheimer approximation.
We can then decompose
FORMULA 
and similarly for the FORMULA  and FORMULA  variables.
The Hamiltonian is then written as sum of three types of
terms
FORMULA 
This Hamiltonian is identical to what we had in
Chapter (), except for the FORMULA  piece
( see Equation (REF ) ).
For example,
the FORMULA  piece can be diagonalized in the same way
as in Chapter (). The interaction piece is also
expressed as the creation and annihilation operators through
the field variables. The FORMULA  piece can be decomposed as follows
in the finite volume. For convenience we use the rescaled
variables given by
FORMULA 
and use the radial variables for  FORMULA
FORMULA 
The derivatives for the FORMULA  are now substituted by
FORMULA 
where the index FORMULA  runs from 1 to FORMULA  while the index
FORMULA  only runs from 1 to FORMULA .
The main difference lies in the derivative term with respect
to the rotator variable FORMULA . In Chapter (),
this was neglected because we were in the infinite volume.
This term practically serves as the kinetic energy of the
zeromode variable FORMULA .
One can establish
the following identity
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the generator of the variable
FORMULA  only, i.e.,
FORMULA 
With these transformations, FORMULA  is further decomposed into
three parts
FORMULA 
The longitudinal part has the same form as the simple oscillator
and can be diagonalized easily. The transverse part can also be
diagonalized as shown in Chapter ()
FORMULA 
where the summation of FORMULA  is from 1 to FORMULA  and the
energy gap is FORMULA  and
FORMULA .
In terms of these operators we can write out the explicit
form of  FORMULA
FORMULA 
where the polarization factor FORMULA  is given by
FORMULA .
To summarize, in the finite volume we would have the following
Hamiltonian
FORMULA 
In this expression, the first two terms are just the Hamiltonian of
the model in the broken phase in the infinite volume. The third
term is a purely finite volume correction which describes the coupling
between the zeromode and the rest of degrees of freedom. The
index FORMULA  takes the value FORMULA  and FORMULA  respectively. All the
operators can be expressed in terms of the creation and annihilation
operators as
FORMULA 
where the form factors FORMULA  are given by the following
table
FORMULA 
The creation and annihilation operators enjoy the following
commutation realtions
FORMULA 
In the higher derivative model we have the similar relation
for the FORMULA  generators acting on the ground state
FORMULA 
With these relations we can now calculate the rotator contribution
to the energy of the state. Due to the selection rule for the
operator FORMULA , the first order correction vanishes. The lowest
order correction comes in at the second order in the perturbation
Hamiltonian. Using the representations of the operators in terms
of the creation and annihilation operators, it is easy to show
that the first correction is simply the rotator energy,
FORMULA 
Therefore, just like in the conventional FORMULA  model in the
broken phase, the rotator energy spectrum is the most densely
spaced excitation and dominates the invariant correlation
functions.

Simulation Results and Discussions

 Simulation Algorithms 
Finding the right algorithms for the higher derivative FORMULA 
model has been quite tricky {{cite:c24f3871-6c41-4947-99ae-ad98da01f5de}}, {{cite:d223cb85-d221-400d-af73-7fd7e813d2c8}}.
In the beginning of this project, we ran many tests
on the existing algorithms for our model. First we tried
some conventional update algorithms, for example: metropolis,
heatbath and hybrid Monte Carlo. But these type of
algorithms had several serious problems.
One of these problems was that due to the next-next nearest neighbor
coupling terms in our model, the neighbor gathering process
becomes a rather time consuming task. In four dimensions, with the
naive discretization, we would have had to collect the field
variables at 128 neighbors for every lattice point.
Compared with the ordinary theory, this is
a factor of 16 more.
Another problem of such algorithms was the critical slowing
down when close to the criticality.
This second problem was understandable
because, in our model, the spectrum of the Fourier modes is greatly
broadened by the higher derivative term.
To understand more about this issue,
let us look at the autocorrelation
time in a standard hybrid Monte Carlo algorithm.
Consider the higher derivative free field theory governed
by the Euclidean Lagrangian
FORMULA 
where the spectrum FORMULA .
The acceptance and autocorrelationts in this Gaussian type of
hybrid Monte Carlo has been studied by A. D. Kennedy et. al.
{{cite:1aac44c0-5583-4826-a887-53cc41fa082e}}. The autocorrelation time of the algorithm
was found to be:
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the average length of each hybrid trajectory.
The quantity FORMULA  is the lowest frequency of the
Fourier modes, i.e. FORMULA .
The minimum of the autocorrelation time is obtained when
FORMULA  with the value FORMULA .
For the stability of the leapfrog integration scheme, the step
size cannot exceed FORMULA , where
FORMULA  is the highest frequency of
the Fourier modes. Therefore, the computer time that
the algorithm consumes to generate an independent configuration
is given by
FORMULA 
Thus, the computer time needed to generate an independent
configuration greatly depends on how broad the extent of the spectrum.
In the conventional model, the highest frequency is given by
FORMULA . The lowest frequency is
just FORMULA .
With the higher derivative term added, the extension of
this frequency is much broader than the former case.
The highest frequency changes to
FORMULA  while
the lowest frequency remains unchanged.
For the parameter range of FORMULA  where we perform our simulation,
this highest frequency is larger by a factor of 10 or more. Therefore,
the autocorrelation time is enormous for the higher derivative
theory in standard hybrid Monte Carlo due to the broadening
effect of the frequency.
For the Gaussian model, this effect can be overcome by
the so-called Fourier acceleration procedure
{{cite:a85ef0b3-e839-4a48-9dd0-8a63e28b60cd}}, {{cite:6d3e9ce7-e9e2-4b29-a931-9967073f1f25}}, {{cite:55d2354e-8836-44a8-b7b7-ca4db387906b}}, which is nothing
but noticing that the ideal
algorithm for the free Lagrangian above is to perform the simulation
in Fourier space by adding the momentum dependent kinetic
energy part
FORMULA 
This FORMULA -dependent kinetic energy part will take into
account exactly the frequency differences of the modes and, in fact, the
FORMULA -dependence for the step size then drops out completely
from the Hamilton equation of motion,
as one can easily check.
This hybrid algorithm is then equivalent to simulating FORMULA  independent
harmonic oscillators with frequency 1
in lattice units. However, nobody would be impressed if
one can simulate a free theory effectively. When the interaction
terms are added, doing the simulation completely in Fourier space is
sometimes hopeless. This is particularly true if the interaction is
of the FORMULA  type, which is completely local in real
space, but highly nonlocal in Fourier space. Therefore, the
hope is that we use a Fast Fourier Transformation program to
go back and forth between the real space and the Fourier space.
When the quadratic parts are evaluated, we go to the
Fourier space, and when the interaction part is needed, we go
to the real space. Obviously, this depends greatly on how fast
one can do the Fourier transform. It turns out the existing
FFT package runs reasonably well on the cray with a speed of
FORMULA  Mflop on the C90-machine. Another complication is that
in the interacting theory we do not know what type of FORMULA -dependent
kinetic energy term to add. The only clue is perturbation theory,
however, one would expect that the low energy modes should be
very well described by the renormalized parameters. It turns out
that the main effect is the broadening effect due to FORMULA , and
FORMULA  does not get renormalized very much. Therefore, putting in the
bare value for FORMULA  basically overcomes most of the critical
slowing down. We are able to perform the simulation with an
autocorrelation time which is below 10 hybrid Monte Carlo trajectories
with each trajectory consisting of FORMULA  steps. Although this
performance is not ideal, it works thousands of times better than
the old programs, for which the autocorrelation time was hopelessly
long. Also, in the Fourier accelerated Hybrid Monte Carlo,
it is trivial to extend the algorithm to the improved actions.
Since the quadratic part is evaluated in the Fourier space, it
does not cost anything more for us to use the improved propagator
as compared with the naive one. If this were implemented in the
real space, it would require a lot more work.
All of our results were obtained with the appropriate Fourier
accelerated Hybrid Monte Carlo program. We currently have only
the version for the finite bare coupling constant. Therefore,
all results presented here are for some finite bare coupling constant.
However, some of our simulation points have a rather large
bare coupling constant in continuum notation, therefore,
we expect that most of the physically interesting results
will be quite similar in the nonlinear limit.

 The Extraction of Physical Parameters 
We will now extract some physical quantities from our
simulation results {{cite:d223cb85-d221-400d-af73-7fd7e813d2c8}}.
One of the most interesting quantities is
the vacuum expectation value FORMULA . This is the quantity which
sets the energy scale of the simulation.
In the old simulations, this parameter was obtained by
measuring the bare expectation value of the averaged
field variable. The wave function renormalization constant
was then obtained from a linear fit to the momentum space
propagator. From these quantities, the
renormalized vev is then obtained using
FORMULA 
The crucial point is the measurement of the wave function
renormalization constant. But in our case, things are more
complicated. The momentum space propagator will
not only contain the usual FORMULA  term, but will also contain the higher
derivative terms. In general, the interaction will
generate more terms which were not in
the bare free propagator. This makes it more difficult for
us to get a very accurate determination of the
wave function renormalization constant.
Another way of extracting the renormalized vev is
from the rotator correlation functions. Using the
theory discussed in Chapter () , we can
write down an expression for the rotator correlation
function FORMULA , where FORMULA  is
the unit vector of the zeromode at a given time
slice  FORMULA
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the
rotator energy unit.
This correlation function is dominated
by the rotator energy spectrum in the finite volume.
All the other energy excitations are much higher
than the rotator energy scale. Usually the lowest one
is the one Higgs contamination, whose energy
scale is an order of magnitude higher. This
correction can be easily taken into account according to
the formula given in Chapter () . Since the rotator
energy depends only on the renormalized vacuum
expectation value (and the 3 volume), this is
a direct way of extracting the vev.
In our simulations, we have tried both methods and have obtained
compatible results.
FIGURE 
In Figure (REF ), a typical rotator correlation function
is shown compared with the fit to the theoretical
form. The bare parameters are shown at the top
of the figure. The lattice size for this run is FORMULA .
The output data has a total statistic of 32k hybrid Monte Carlo
trajectories.
At very short distances, higher energy excitations
will contribute. Therefore, the fit was performed from FORMULA 
all the way to the end. The fit is very stable if the starting
point is after FORMULA . The fit is also very stable with respect
to the number of rotator states (FORMULA  in the figure) that has been included.
It turns out that any number which is greater
than 3 would be adequate.
In this fit, the correction of the single Higgs state is included
using the formula described in Chapter ().
This correction is about
10 percent even at large FORMULA  values. This is because
of the small vev value of our simulation. The corrections due to the
other states are all very small at large FORMULA  values.
It is clear that we have found a very good agreement with
the theoretical formula.
FIGURE 
For comparison, the momentum space Higgs propagator is shown in
Figure (REF ).
This momentum propagator was obtained from a run of the
same input bare parameters as in Figure (REF )
except that it was on
a cubic geometry of FORMULA  with the statistic of 20k trajectories.
The form of the fitting function is taken to be
FORMULA .
Note that the size of the coefficient of
FORMULA  term is quite significant which is a signal of
strong interaction effects. We should keep in mind that the above
function has no justification if the interaction is strong.
In general, the interaction could introduce complicated functional
forms to the full Higgs propagator. It could generate
FORMULA  terms, higher polynomial terms and even terms that
cannot be written as functions of FORMULA  alone. Therefore, the
size of the interaction terms like FORMULA  basically reflects
the ambiguity of the fit. If we had tried the same fit but setting
the coefficients of FORMULA  to zero, we would have arrived at a
rather different value of FORMULA  ( FORMULA  ).
From this we conclude that, due to the strong interaction, it would
be very difficult to extract the wave function renormalization constant
from the momentum space propagator.
Other methods are needed for the extraction of the physical
parameters and the momentum space propagator can only be used as an
independent check.
Another important quantity is the mass of the
Higgs particle. In the old simulations, there were also
two ways of obtaining the Higgs mass.
One way is to use a
fit to the momentum space propagator. The mass obtained
this way has both advantages and disadvantages. The advantage
is that the signal is very clean and we get a very
stable fit for the mass even with low statistics.
We can fit the very low momentum portion of the momentum
space propagator where the effects of the interaction
terms are small and the mass values are rather stable.
The disadvantage is
that the mass obtained from the propagator is not yet the
physical Higgs mass. We must use perturbation
theory to relate the two masses. This is legitimate in
the old FORMULA  calculation because, in that case, the
theory is perturbative and the perturbative formula offers
us a rather accurate prediction. In a truly nonperturbative
theory, however, this could be misleading. The mass obtained
from the propagator fit, what we call the off-shell mass,
could deviate significantly from the physical mass.
Another way of determining the Higgs mass is from the time
slice correlation function of the Higgs field. In this
approach, the lowest energy gap of the Higgs excitation
is extracted and identified as the Higgs mass in the
finite volume. This, of course, should be closer to
the physical mass than the off-shell mass and, in a
strongly interacting theory this is the only way to
get a good control of the Higgs mass. In our simulation of
the higher derivative theory, the interaction is much stronger
than the conventional FORMULA  case, therefore, we used this method to
extract the Higgs mass. The off shell Higgs mass was also
determined and only served as a comparison.
FIGURE 
In Figure (REF ),
we have shown the time sliced Higgs correlation function
as a function of the Euclidean time separation FORMULA . The bare
parameters are also shown at the top of the figure. At small distances,
all higher energy excitations contribute, including the ghost states.
Therefore, to ensure that we extract the lowest radial excitation, we
started the fit from some FORMULA  values so that the fit was stable
from there on. The functional form that we used is the standard
hyperbolic cosine function for a single excitation.
The data of the correlation function is derived from
a blocking analysis of 32k hybrid Monte Carlo trajectories. If we
compare this fitted mass value with the off shell mass, we find
that the difference is very significant, which means the interaction
is really much stronger when compared with the conventional FORMULA  case.
The data points of the correlation function are highly correlated.
Therefore, we should develop a method to determine the error of
the fitted mass value.
To determine the error of the mass parameter, we performed the following
blocking procedure. The output data is originally divided into small
blocks. For this particular example, we had 80 blocks available.
Due the large fluctuation, a single block is not enough to give stable
mass values. Therefore, the small blocks are first grouped together to
form FORMULA  larger blocks, large enough so that we can extract stable mass
values from them. For each large block FORMULA , the following ratio is formed
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  runs from 1 to the total number of large blocks FORMULA .
If we have only a single excitation that dominates the correlation
function, then
the correlation function should be of the form
FORMULA 
Therefore, the ratio should only depend on the mass FORMULA  and
the Euclidean time separation FORMULA ,
FORMULA 
Then the blocked values FORMULA  are set to the theoretical value
and we can solve for the mass numerically for each FORMULA . The outcome of this
procedure is called the “effective mass”, denoted as FORMULA .
Then, the averaged effective mass is obtained by
FORMULA 
We can also obtain an error for the effective mass by
FORMULA 
FIGURE 
We can then plot the effective mass as a function of the time
separation FORMULA , together with the appropriate errors.
This is shown in Figure (REF ).
We found
that,
since many states contribute for small values of FORMULA , the
effective mass is varying with FORMULA . However, if we go to FORMULA 
values that are large enough, all the higher energy excitations die
out exponentially and the lowest energy excitation dominates. Therefore
starting from some FORMULA  value, we should see a plateau behavior of
the effective mass. The value of the plateau should basically be
the energy of the lowest energy excitation.
Since the signal is getting exponentially small with FORMULA , the error
of the effective mass function will grow significantly with FORMULA .
Usually near the endpoint (FORMULA ), the errors become so
large that effective mass value is no longer meaningful. We
can then perform a FORMULA  fit to the effective mass, giving higher
weight to the more accurate points. From this fit, we can determine
the mass and its error.
But this is not the whole story yet. In fact even in the second
approach, what we extract is not the infinite volume Higgs mass.
The reason for this is very simple. All the simulations are
done in a finite volume, and finite size effects must
be taken into account. Among all the finite effects, there is
one effect that is most disturbing. In the infinite volume, the
Goldstone particles are exactly massless. Therefore, the Higgs
particle can decay into two Goldstone particles, thus the Higgs
has a finite lifetime. In the simulation, however, because the
volume is finite, the lowest Goldstone pair is not at zero
energy, but is equal to FORMULA . This number is rather
large for most of our simulations. In fact, it is larger
than the Higgs mass itself. So the situation that we have in
our simulation is that the Higgs is lighter than the Goldstone
pair, and it therefore cannot decay. Of course, when the volume
is increased, the Higgs mass energy level will meet the two
Goldstone levels and the so-called level crossing phenomenon occurs. This
was noticed quite some time ago. In fact, many groups have
used this picture to get both the physical Higgs mass and its
width from the measurement of the two Goldstone levels. In this
picture, the Higgs is viewed as a resonance of the Goldstone
Goldstone scattering process. Lüscher derived a formula which
relates the Goldstone pair energy level in the finite volume
to the infinite volume Goldstone-Goldstone scattering phase
shift. By measuring the two Goldstone energy levels as accurately
as possible for various volumes, one gets the continuum
scattering phase shift profile in an energy range. If all the
parameters are well chosen, one would be able to see a phase
shift stepping from almost zero to almost FORMULA  exactly at
the threshold energy which is equal to the physical Higgs mass.
One would also be able to get the physical width of the Higgs
by fitting it to the Breit-Wigner shape near the resonance.
So, instead of fighting against the finite
volume effects, one could utilize it to gain precious information
about the continuum theory.
To carry out a similar calculation in our model is more difficult
than the usual FORMULA  model. First of all, we must establish
an equivalent formula in the higher derivative theory which can
relate the energy levels in the finite volume to the phase shift
in the infinite volume. Secondly, we have extra particles in our
model, namely the ghost pairs. We have to control their
contribution to the correlation functions in order to get
reliable results for the two Goldstone energy levels. Thirdly,
our model requires much more computing power to get good
stable results for the time sliced correlation functions.
The detailed analysis of this problem is given in the
next chapter.
The simulation results we have obtained belong to one of
the following two categories. One is performed with the naive
discretization action and the other category is performed by using
the improved action. We have done simulations in both
phases of the theory. The following table summarizes the
bare parameter and extracted physical quantities of the points.
TABLE 
In this table, points FORMULA  through FORMULA  are the results for
the naive action while points FORMULA  through
FORMULA  are for the improved action. Point
FORMULA  and point FORMULA  are in the symmetric phase, while
all other points are in the broken phase.
In the symmetric phase, the important physical quantity
is the renormalized coupling constant, which could be defined
to be the connected 4-point function at zero external
momenta. In order to get this quantity, the propagator mass is
measured. The renormalized coupling
constant
is directly measured by forming the connected
4-point function. The
measurement of the renormalized coupling
constant is very noisy, which requires large
statistics of the data. We used the following
formula to extract the connected four point function
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the number of components of the field,
FORMULA  is the propagator mass and FORMULA  is the
4-volume of the system. The quantity
FORMULA  is defined to be
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the 4-volume average of
the field FORMULA .
The quantity FORMULA  is just a short hand notation for
FORMULA , and the bracket means the
Monte Carlo ensemble average.
It is the subtraction in the bracket which causes most of
the noise. Therefore, in order to get sensible results
we have accumulated large statistics for the two points
in the symmetric phase (Point G and J in the table).
FIGURE 
In Figure (REF ),
we have shown the renormalized coupling constant for
individual runs for the higher derivative FORMULA  model.
It can be seen that the result is
quite noisy and the points scatter a lot around the
average. Usually FORMULA  is needed for an error of
about 10 percent.
We can now compare the renormalized coupling constant that
we measured for the higher derivative FORMULA  model with that
of the conventional FORMULA  model {{cite:b0b213f0-f776-4b61-b13f-84dd200a9152}}.
In the symmetric phase (point G and J),
we found that the renormalized coupling constants
were much larger than in the
old lattice simulation results of FORMULA  model.
In the conventional
FORMULA  model, when the correlation length was about FORMULA 
the renormalized coupling constant FORMULA  was typically
of the order of FORMULA . In our model, however, we saw
a huge jump (about a factor of 2 to 3)
of the renormalized coupling constant. This is a signal that
the higher derivative model is much more strongly coupled
than the conventional FORMULA  model.
Recall that, from the large FORMULA  calculations in Chapter (), large
FORMULA  also predicts a jump in the renormalized coupling constant in
the symmetric phase. Therefore, our simulation results agree
with the large FORMULA  results qualitatively.
In the broken phase, the renormalized vacuum expectation
values are obtained using the rotator correlation functions
as described above. The errors are estimated from
a blocking analysis of the data.
The Higgs mass is taken to be
lowest radial energy excitation in the finite volume.
As described above, we tried two ways of extracting
this energy gap. One by fitting the time sliced correlation
function to the hyperbolic cosine function, the other from
the effective mass plot. Both methods gave compatible results
and the errors are determined from the FORMULA  fit of the
effective mass plateau in the appropriate range.
Identifying this energy gap with the infinite volume
Higgs mass is of course a rather crude approximation
and is subject to finite volume corrections. However, as
shown in the table, we did not see a significant change
in the FORMULA  ratio when the lattice volume was increased.
In fact, they are compatible with each other within errors.
We also tested this within the framework of the large
FORMULA  approximation. We found that the ratio FORMULA  was
rather stable when the size of the box was changed, as long
as the box size was not too small and the energy crossing
phenomenon had not occurred. And the value of the ratio was
in agreement with the infinite volume large FORMULA  value.
Therefore, we expect that this ratio represents the feature
of the continuum higher derivative theory. The correct way
of extracting the Higgs mass has to come from the finite
volume resonance picture, which we will discuss in the
next chapter.
Another issue in the Higgs mass bound problem is to determine
how much scaling violations (cutoff effects) are present
in our results. This turns out to be a rather subtle
issue. To study this problem, we have to answer the following
two questions: (1) what is the nature of the scaling violations
in our model and, (2) how can we calculate the scaling violations
once the Higgs mass and the ghost parameters are known.
First we will review how the above two questions are answered in
the conventional FORMULA  model simulations. In the conventional
FORMULA  model, the scaling violation is due to the hypercubic
lattice that violates Euclidean (or rotational) invariance.
This scaling violation can be defined both perturbatively and
nonperturbatively. To calculate this scaling violation, we can
check the rotational invariance of some quantity, for example, the
free propagator of the field {{cite:9e001ce0-572a-4b3d-8491-5b1088a704f8}}, or
evaluate the Goldstone scattering amplitude and compare with
perturbation theory {{cite:87e24096-a42f-452d-9fd7-1a240352321b}}, {{cite:6d9c0fa9-100f-4cdd-a314-44e74079409e}}, {{cite:0ad0ccc8-f930-4f05-a6f2-18449cfb4140}}, {{cite:0aa48ad6-2057-4838-a46c-a0b12a2ae7d8}}. The second method
seems to be more closely related to measurable quantities, but
it relies on the perturbative nature of the problem.
It worked out nicely for the conventional FORMULA  simply
because even at the highest bound, the theory is still perturbative.
The first method
offers us an unambiguous result
without using perturbation theory.
Now, let us look at the situation for the higher derivative
lattice theory.
People tend to think that in the higher derivative FORMULA  theory
there exist two types of scaling violations. One is the effect due
to the lattice; the other one is what is usually called the
Pauli-Villar cutoff (or ghost) effects. However, such a statement
is very misleading. In fact, as we have shown in the
previous chapters, this should not be the view, at least not the
only view, of the higher
derivative theory. This theory is a well defined field theory which
has a unitary FORMULA -matrix and the ghost effects can easily evade the
experimental tests. It is also
a well-defined theory free of divergences.
Therefore, if we could do the simulation
in the continuum, we would have had no cutoff effects
at all. It is only because the computer cannot handle
infinite number of variables that we have to introduce
the underline lattice to the theory. As long as we
can constrain our lattice effects to be small, our
simulation results should represent the higher derivative
FORMULA  model in the continuum. In other words, there are no
“ghost effects” if the ghosts are well
hidden from any experiment.
As stated previously, in analyzing the lattice effects,
perturbation theory should only be taken as a hint.
There have been ways of doing
nonperturbative analysis of the lattice
effects, though none of them is really
sophisticated. One of the things that could be
done is to analyze the breaking of the Euclidean
invariance of the free propagator at some given parameters.
This was first discussed by Lang et. al. in 1988 {{cite:9e001ce0-572a-4b3d-8491-5b1088a704f8}}.
Although it only uses the tree level propagator,
it is still a very good measurement
of the amount of lattice violations in the theory.
Obviously, going beyond this using perturbation
theory is hopeless if the
theory is strongly interacting. One can try to
carry out the same analysis for the propagator
in the large FORMULA  approximation, but again, the
justification for the large FORMULA  approximation at
FORMULA  is not very promising either.
Let us now review some of the basic ideas of how this
procedure is carried out for the propagator.
On the lattice, the propagator in momentum space
is, in general, a function
of every individual momentum component.
In the continuum, however, it should only depend on
the combination FORMULA 
due to Euclidean invariance. This symmetry is violated on
the lattice and we can define a quantity
FORMULA  which represents the
amount of violation due to the lattice.
For the inverse momentum space propagator,
the quantity FORMULA 
is defined in the following way.
Let us pick some prescribed momentum scale FORMULA  in lattice
units, and pick our reference momentum to be
FORMULA . Then we can form all the momenta that
have the same magnitude as this reference momentum in
the form
FORMULA .
We can then define the rotational invariance violation by
FORMULA  by
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the invariant measure for the rotational
group normalize in such a way that FORMULA . Obviously
this quantity is identically zero in the continuum where the
rotational invariance is restored. On the lattice, the size
of this quantity is a measure of the lattice effects in the
discretized theory. In principle we can define
similar quantities for other functions.
We have performed the rotation invariance analysis for our
simulation points using both the tree level and
large FORMULA  approximation.
In Figure (REF ), we have shown some of the rotational
invariance violations
for the tree level propagator of our simulation points
FIGURE 
We found that all our
simulation points have very small lattice effects.
For example, even with the naive propagator, in
the Higgs mass range where we did our simulation,
the rotational invariance violation is not larger
than the old FORMULA  simulation points with correlation
length of FORMULA .
We can also calculate the finite volume lattice violation
in both the free propagator and in the large FORMULA  approximation.
In a finite box with lattice structure the lattice momenta
are discrete and can only be multiples of FORMULA . For each
integer FORMULA  there will be more than one set of solution
FORMULA 
to the equation FORMULA .
Denoting the total number of solutions by FORMULA ,
we can then define the counterpart of FORMULA  in
the finite lattice
FORMULA 
Due the finite size effects, the momentum lattice is coarse grained.
This will result in some zigzag behavior of the function
FORMULA , as FORMULA  is increasing.
However, for a reasonably large lattice, we will recover the
infinite lattice results.
FIGURE 
In Figure (REF ), this rotational violation
is shown for one of our simulation points for
the large FORMULA  propagator. All the rotational invariance violation
are well under one percent level.
We are therefore confident that our results should
represent the features of the higher derivative
theory in the continuum.

 Extracting Scattering Phase Shift Using Finite Size Techniques

 Resonance in Finite Volume 
In the previous chapter we argued that extracting the mass
parameter of an unstable particle in a finite volume is not
a trivial task. For the volume that people usually perform
their Monte Carlo simulations, the lowest two Goldstone particle state has
an energy eigenvalue which is higher than the Higgs mass parameter.
This means that in such volumes the Higgs cannot decay into the
Goldstone pair as it should in the infinite volume, even
if the interaction between the Higgs and two Goldstone state
is turned on. This problem
can be solved in two ways if the theory is
only weakly interacting. In the first conventional
way, one tries to extract the propagator mass in the
finite volume, then the finite volume corrections are added
to get the propagator mass in the continuum infinite volume.
After that the perturbation theory is used again to relate
the propagator mass to the on-shell physical mass of the
Higgs particle. The width of the Higgs can also
be calculated using perturbation theory. This method
heavily utilizes perturbation theory. The second method is
to extract the infinite volume continuum results directly by measuring
some quantity in the finite volume. With this method, one needs
a general formula which will relate the infinite volume
quantities to the finite volume quantities without using
perturbation theory. In the conventional FORMULA  simulations
both methods have been tried and they give compatible
results. It is obvious that for our higher derivative
FORMULA  model, due to its strong interaction, only the
second one can be used to analyze the finite size effects.
In fact, the basic idea of the second approach is to
make use of the finite size effects
instead of fighting them. Let us now review some of the
basic ideas of this approach.
We start with the conventional FORMULA  model without the
higher derivatives. The basic particle excitations in the
broken phase in a finite box consist of Higgs excitations and Goldstone
excitations. Consider the eigenstate of one Higgs
excitation and the eigenstates of two
Goldstone excitations.
FIGURE 
Due to the Euclidean invariance, we can
take the rest frame of the Higgs particle.
There is a major difference between the energy of the
Higgs excitation and the Goldstone excitations.
The Goldstone pair with opposite three
momenta has an energy eigenvalue which is
dependent of the box size. The lowest one
is FORMULA  where FORMULA  is cubic box size.
The Higgs excitation, however, will not
depend on the box size and is just a constant.
To the lowest order, these particles behave just like
free particles. In Figure (REF ), the dependence of these
eigenvalues are shown.
After the interaction is turned on,
the one Higgs excitation mixes with the
Goldstone pair excitation. For small box
sizes, when the Higgs mass is below the
lowest Goldstone pair excitation energy
for that box size, ordinary perturbation theory
will give us the correction of these
energy levels if the interaction is not too
strong. For some larger box size, however, the Higgs
excitation will cross the Goldstone pair excitation
and for that particular box size, degenerate perturbation
theory should be used to calculate the level crossing.
If the interaction is weak, one would expect a plateau
in a range of FORMULA  which should be identified as the
physical Higgs mass and the splitting at the crossing
point basically gives you the width of the Higgs particle.
In order to use this picture of resonance in a finite box,
a nonperturbative relation must be established from which
one can get the relation between infinite volume quantities
and the finite volume quantities. Finally, if the finite volume
quantities are measured in the Monte Carlo simulations, we
can use this relation to deduce the infinite volume results
nonperturbatively.

 Lüscher's Formula
In the infinite volume, the Higgs particle is identified as
a resonance in the isospin 0 channel in Goldstone-Goldstone
scattering. As in any two particle scattering process, the
scattering cross section is characterized by the scattering
phase shift FORMULA  at a given center of mass energy.
When the center of mass energy is at the physical Higgs mass,
we see a peak in the scattering cross section and the
scattering phase shift rises dramatically from almost
zero to almost FORMULA . In this case, there is
a resonance in the scattering process and a Higgs particle
is produced. The mass of the Higgs particle is identified
by the position of the peak or
equivalently by the energy at which FORMULA  crosses
FORMULA . The width of the particle is given
by the range in which FORMULA  steps from almost 0
to almost FORMULA .
For an ideal resonance, that is
the resonance which is infinitely narrow,
the scattering phase shift will step up
exactly FORMULA . But for wide resonances the sharpness
and the height of the step is greatly reduced.
Therefore, the scattering phase shift in the infinite volume
fully describes the properties of the Higgs particle.
People have derived a relation which relates the infinite volume
phase shift to the two Goldstone particle energy eigenvalues
in the finite volume. This relation, with the name Lüscher's
formula, was derived first by DeWitt
in a different form {{cite:c9fb8fe2-3ad6-49c5-a4f4-f14225325b5d}}.
Later Lüscher rederived it and expreseed in a form suitable
for nonperturbative Monte Carlo simulations
{{cite:086a3f5c-c7fc-45bd-a9b8-066ef9543c75}}, {{cite:ddab16f0-d78d-4cae-be69-c6e4d8b16135}}. It was used by
Zimmermann et. al. to study the conventional FORMULA  model
and proved to work very well {{cite:c98cd3f4-8b38-417e-b7c8-a131bc87fbf5}}, {{cite:daf3ce36-99ce-4d11-bbe8-fc676ce2d9c9}}.
We now derive this formula with
a method that is based on DeWitt, since this can be easily generalized
to the higher derivative case.
Consider a quantum mechanical system governed by the Hamiltonian
FORMULA  in a three dimensional box whose side is FORMULA . We can
define the resolvent operators FORMULA  and FORMULA  as
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is just an arbitrary complex number.
Consider the matrix elements of FORMULA 
between two states FORMULA  and FORMULA .
where FORMULA  and FORMULA 
are eigenstates of the free
Hamiltonian FORMULA , i.e.
FORMULA ,
FORMULA .
We have
FORMULA 
Let us now define the self energy operator such that
FORMULA 
Then the matrix element of FORMULA  may be written as
FORMULA 
The self energy operator defined above satisfies the following
integral equations
FORMULA 
Setting FORMULA  in the above equation we get
FORMULA 
Note that the pole of FORMULA  in the complex FORMULA  plain should be
the exact eigenvalue of state FORMULA , and we get
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the eigenvalue of the
full Hamiltonian for the state that is perturbed from FORMULA .
This formula tells us that the expectation value of the
self energy operator in some state gives us
the so-called energy shift which is the energy
difference between the exact eigenvalues and the free
eigenvalues.
Let us now look at this integral equation in a very large
box, where the intermediate states are very dense and we
would expect to be able to go to the continuum limit. In fact,
we can write down an expression
FORMULA 
where the function FORMULA  is given by the energy shell sum
FORMULA 
This relation is obtained in the following way. Imagine that
FORMULA  is some real number and we take some small real positive
number FORMULA  and divide the real axis into a small interval
FORMULA  and the rest. For a very large box, the
eigenvalues FORMULA  will be very dense and they are treated
separately, depending on whether they fall in the interval or not.
For those states whose eigenvalues fall outside the small interval,
the sum will better approximate the principal valued expression
if we take smaller FORMULA  values. For any fixed FORMULA 
there will be infinite eigenvalues which fall into the small interval, as
long as the box size is going to infinity. For these states, if the
operator is inserted in some smooth function of the energy,
they are equivalent to the delta function which selects out
the specific energy. The function FORMULA  is basically the
degeneracy sum of all the states that has almost the same energy
in the infinite volume.
With this relation we can rewrite Equation (REF )
in the following way
FORMULA 
If we now take FORMULA  and make use of
Equation (REF ) we get
FORMULA 
We can then multiply both sides by a factor of
FORMULA .
Note that the scattering phase shift operator
is given by
FORMULA 
also we can take our states FORMULA  to
be diagonal in angular momentum, we then get
FORMULA 
This is the basic formula which relates the scattering
phase shift in the infinite volume to the exact
energy eigenvalues in the finite volume.
To be specific with the function FORMULA , note that
in the isospin 0 channel of two Goldstone
particles with opposite momenta FORMULA , we have the relation
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the energy of one Goldstone particle. We
get FORMULA  ,so
FORMULA 
where we have used the dispersion relation for the
Goldstone FORMULA  and FORMULA . The zeta function
is defined to be
FORMULA 
where the function FORMULA  is the usual
spherical harmonics. When this expression is substituted
into the general formula, we get
FORMULA 
This is exactly Lüscher's formula that has been used by
Zimmermann et. al. in their simulation except that they
were working with the nonzero mass case for the Goldstone
particle. It is clear from the above derivation that
the condition of the massive Goldstone is not necessary.
In fact, as we will see below,
we have tested the massless case in the conventional
FORMULA  case and got consistent results with Zimmermann et. al..
This problem can be understood in the following way. Recall that
in Lüscher's derivation of the formula, he assumes that
the pion (Goldstone) has a finite mass due to
the non-vanishing external source.
This external source tilts the potential and makes the
potential lower in the direction of the external source.
Therefore in the potential valley it is not flat but rather
has a slope. This is why the Goldstone particles become massive.
Then the Higgs field is defined to be the 4-volume
average of the field variable along that particular
direction. The Goldstone field is defined to be the field along the
directions that are orthogonal to the Higgs field.
However, when the external source is gets smaller,
the tilting in the potential becomes weaker. As a
result, the fluctuation around the Higgs direction becomes
stronger. In the limit of a vanishing external source, the
special direction is not defined at all and the potential
becomes totally FORMULA  invariant.
It is clear that in this limit, the Higgs field and the pion
field is not well-defined.
This is also seen in the finite volume correction of the
pion mass.
Therefore, if the
box is too small, we will not be able to disentangle the
energy correction to the one pion energy and the interaction
between the two. In this case, the correction to the single
pion mass depends on the quantity FORMULA  exponentially.
When the pion mass goes to zero, the finite size correction
to the single pion energy will be very large. This is the
main reason that one has to take the nonzero pion mass.
In fact, the situation in the FORMULA  model is more subtle.
First of all, the massless pion dispersion relation is
protected by the symmetry in the very large volume limit.
Therefore, the energy of a
single pion would be exactly multiple of FORMULA , even if
the interaction is turned on.
Exactly at the vanishing external source, we know that the
above picture is not a good picture of the symmetry breaking
mechanism in the finite volume. Instead, we should use
the Born-Oppenheimer picture discussed in
Chapter () . In the Born-Oppenheimer picture, the pions are
massless, and the zero momentum pion is replaced by the
rotator excitations. The Higgs field can also be meaningfully
defined. As we have seen in Chapter () ,
there will be no large finite volume corrections
to the two pion energy hence the energy shift in the
finite box totally reflects the interaction between the
two pions. Note that there is no contradiction to the finite
external source case. If the external source is present and
significantly different from 0, then the conventional picture of
the massive pion works very well and
the Born-Oppenheimer picture
would be a very bad approximation since the potential is so tilted.
On the other hand, the Born-Oppenheimer picture is valid for
very small external source
where the conventional picture breaks down.
Therefore, our conclusion is that Lüsher's formula will still
work even in the massless pion case, as long as the
field definitions are adjusted according to the
Born-Oppenheimer picture described in detail in Chapter ().

 Integral Representation of the Zeta Function 
In the Lüscher's formula, the zeta function needs to be dealt with
carefully. For the cubic geometry, it turns out that a useful integral
representation of the function
exists which we will now discuss {{cite:086a3f5c-c7fc-45bd-a9b8-066ef9543c75}}.
In general, the zeta function is defined to be
FORMULA 
where the symbol FORMULA  stands for the usual spherical
harmonic functions and the summation is over all the three dimensional
integers. In order to derive the integral representation, let us also
define the heat kernel by
FORMULA 
We will also need the truncated heat kernel
FORMULA 
Then the zeta function has the following representation
FORMULA 
as long as FORMULA  satisfies the condition FORMULA . Note that
the combination FORMULA 
has the following asymptotic behavior
FORMULA 
Therefore we immediately have the following analytic continuation for
the zeta function in the range FORMULA ,
FORMULA 
In particular for FORMULA  we have
FORMULA 
The above integral representation is suitable for numerical evaluation
of the zeta function. The integrand is evaluated for any FORMULA  value
and the integrals are performed numerically using the standard
integration subroutines (e.g. IMSL). When evaluating the integrand one
has to distinguish the case for FORMULA  and FORMULA . The first
line in the representation (REF )
is used for the case FORMULA  while the
second line is used for the case FORMULA  for better convergence. It
turns out that an accurate numerical answer can be obtained for
FORMULA  values not larger than 10, which is the case in the practical
applications.

 Simulation Results on the Conventional FORMULA  Model 
As mentioned in the previous section, we performed a test simulation
first on the conventional FORMULA  model without the external source
term. Therefore, our pion dispersion is the massless dispersion. The
simulation was done using a cluster update program which runs very
efficiently on the alpha AXP workstation. In the simulation, we made
measurements after every 10 cluster updates and for each lattice size
a 100,000 to 200,000 measurements were accumulated. The operators that we
took into account were the radial Higgs field, and the four lowest pion
pair states. We chose our
simulation point so that the Higgs mass would
come out around FORMULA . We were also working in the nonlinear limit of the
FORMULA  model and the input bare parameter was the hopping parameter
FORMULA  which we fixed to be FORMULA . Old simulation results indicate
FIGURE 
that the Higgs mass for this point should be FORMULA . We scanned the
size of our 3-volume from 8 to 24 with a step of 2. The correlation
functions were then analyzed to extract the energy levels in this isospin
zero channel. The correlation matrix was diagonalized and the eigenvalues
were used to extract the energy levels. The errors of the energy levels
were obtained by blocking the data. These errors in the energy levels
then translate into the errors in the phase shift when using
Lüscher's formula.
The final results can be summarized in Figure (REF ),
where we
have plotted the the scattering phase shift as a function of the center
of mass energy obtained from the application of Lüscher's formula
(the data points). The solid line is a perturbative fit to the data
which yields a mass and width compatible with the expected results. The
dashed line represent the
perturbative results when the old values of FORMULA  are
substituted in.
The highest point is for the lattice size FORMULA  and
this point overshoots the expected values. This could be
because of the lattice effects and the subleading finite
volume effects. The rest of the points agree nicely with the perturbative
results. The large error bars for the larger lattices is
purely due to the lack of the statistics.
This plot is a clear indication that the formula also works in
the massless case, as long as we define our Higgs field properly.

 Lüscher's Fomula for Higher Derivative Theory 
The relation in the higher derivative theory is quite similar to that
in the conventional theory. We just have to repeat most parts
of the previous derivation and make adjustments accordingly.
In the case of the higher derivative theory, the Hamiltonian is still
self adjoint, i.e.
FORMULA 
We will still define the resolvent operators as
FORMULA 
We will set up the basis FORMULA  such that
FORMULA 
where the eigenvalue FORMULA  could be complex. The state
are chosen to satisfy FORMULA . We can now define the self energy operator
according to
FORMULA 
and it satisfies the following integral equation
FORMULA 
Similarly the energy shift is given by the diagonal matrix element of
the self energy operator.
FORMULA 
In the large 3-volume limit,
the intermediate state summation in the integral equation of the self
energy reduce to the following
FORMULA 
Taking FORMULA  we again arrive at
FORMULA 
The delta function in the above equation restricts the intermediate
states summation to take only
the real energy eigenstates. The matrix element
of the operator FORMULA  between
the physical states is nothing but the phase shift as can be verified
from the general formula established in Chapter ().
Therefore, we would
conclude that the Lüscher's formula will still work, even in the
case of the higher derivative theory with ghost states.

 Phase Shift for Higher Derivative Theory in FORMULA  Expansion 
As we have established the validity for the Lüscher's formula for
the higher derivative, it is very instructive to show that this
indeed will work out in the large FORMULA  expansion. Recall that the
continuum scattering phase shift for the higher derivative theory has
been calculated in Chapter () in the large FORMULA  expansion. There the
FIGURE 
unitarity is maintained in the large FORMULA  expansion and the phase
shift could have some microscopic acausal effects. To verify that
Lüscher's formula in the higher derivative theory, we have evaluated
the energy eigenvalues for the two Goldstone particle in the isospin
0 channel in the large FORMULA  limit.
This is done by solving for the real roots of the matrix element
FORMULA . In the leading order of
the FORMULA  expansion this matrix element reduces to the geometric
summation of the Goldstone bubbles.
Then these eigenvalues are
substituted into Lüscher's formula to extract the phase shift, which
is then plotted against the center of mass energy of the scattering.
In Figure (REF ),
the result of this calculation is shown. The points are
the phase shift values obtained from Lüscher's formula. The solid line
is the corresponding continuum calculation of the phase shift as
described in Chapter ().
It is evident that the formula is working very
well. We have tried the same procedure for other set of parameters
and they all give good agreement with the continuum calculations.

 Phase Shift Simulations for Higher Derivative Theory 
The result from the large FORMULA  expansion makes us confident
that the same procedure could be carried out for the higher derivative
field theory just as it was done for the conventional FORMULA  model.
Owing to the improved action, we can now select our Higgs mass
value to be around FORMULA  and the ghost mass parameter at
FORMULA  and still keep the lattice effects small. This makes it
possible to perform such simulations on the higher derivative
FORMULA  model.
However, there are quite a number of technical difficulties.
One of the
main difficulties is that some efficient
algorithms that are available for the
conventional theory break down miserably for the higher derivative
theory. For example, the over relaxation algorithm
is very slow for the higher derivative theory due to the neighbor
gathering. The cluster algorithm is simply not working at all (
the whole lattice tends to become one huge cluster).
In fact the only usable algorithm is the Fourier accelerated hybrid
Monte Carlo algorithm, which only
works for finite bare coupling. Also, it
is not as efficient as the algorithms mentioned above for the
conventional theory. This means that to really get the stable
energy levels, we would have to run a rather long time.
Another difficulty is the understanding of the shape of the
phase shift as a function of the center of mass energy. If the
theory is strongly interacting, we can no longer hope to fit the
simulation data to the perturbative results.
A scheme to extract the physical parameters like the Higgs mass
and its width is needed. If the Higgs resonance is well separated
from the ghost, we could try the Breit-Wigner shape near the
resonance, neglecting the effects of the ghosts.
The simulation of this project is still in progress and we hope
to release the results in the near future.

Conclusions
Our project was first motivated by the study of the Higgs
mass bound problem in a Pauli-Villars regulated theory
{{cite:bdc1fede-3b98-4c18-a429-2cbc90119f95}}, {{cite:572f2633-4a4c-400d-9123-47c865271dda}}, {{cite:2d7e9be0-5c18-44b1-9816-e31bd4dfca2e}}.
This theory
can be viewed as a limiting case of the higher derivative
FORMULA  scalar field theory.
The study of the higher derivative theory goes
beyond the scope of the Higgs mass bound problem.
The higher derivative FORMULA  model that we have studied is
obtained from the conventional FORMULA  scalar field theory by
adding higher derivative terms to the Higgs kinetic energy
{{cite:bdf09830-6112-495b-b6f5-3553eed4d505}}, {{cite:bdc1fede-3b98-4c18-a429-2cbc90119f95}}, {{cite:572f2633-4a4c-400d-9123-47c865271dda}}.
We have established
the consistent quantization procedure of the higher derivative
scalar field theory, and have shown this theory to
be finite and unitary with possible violations of microscopic
causality {{cite:7d67129f-8daf-4d96-9690-a8408c43f803}}. Therefore, the ghost states in the theory
can easily evade experimental tests.
We have also studied
the model nonperturbatively in
computer simulations by introducing an underlying lattice structure.
In the continuum,
the higher derivative FORMULA  model can be viewed as the
Pauli-Villars regulated conventional FORMULA  model in the
small FORMULA  limit, where FORMULA  is the Higgs mass and
the FORMULA  is the Pauli-Villars mass parameter. It can also
be viewed as a finite, well-defined
and unitary theory with ghost excitations.
The continuum large FORMULA  study of our model shows that
this theory can incorporate a heavy Higgs particle in the
TeV range, with the ghost pair well hidden at a few times
heavier than the Higgs particle {{cite:bdc1fede-3b98-4c18-a429-2cbc90119f95}}.
On the lattice, our model can represent different universality
classes of models, depending on how the criticality is approached.
It could represent the conventional
trivial FORMULA  model at criticality,
in which case, the higher derivative terms indeed become irrelevant.
However, in another limit, it
could also represent the higher derivative FORMULA  theory in the
continuum, in which case, the theory is not trivial and
the higher derivative terms cannot be viewed as irrelevant
operators in the Lagrangian.
From our simulation results of the model, it is evident that
any attempt to perform a systematic search of higher dimensional
operators to determine the Higgs mass bound would not make
any sense {{cite:2d7e9be0-5c18-44b1-9816-e31bd4dfca2e}}, since,
as far as the Higgs mass bound is concerned,
one cannot tell whether a higher dimensional operator is
relevant for the problem or not.
In our nonperturbative simulation of the model, we find:
(1) Our model can generate a much heavier Higgs particle than
the conventional FORMULA  model, which is in agreement with the
large FORMULA  result qualitatively.
Without introducing the more complicated structures like
technicolor,
it is possible in our model to
have a strongly interacting
Higgs sector, which was excluded
by earlier lattice studies of the conventional model.
(2) It is difficult to establish a bound for Higgs particle
in our model, because by the time the Higgs is heavy enough, it
would be impossible for us to define the scaling violations in
our model. In fact, in our model, we believe the notion of the
Higgs mass bound loses its meaning, unless some new nonperturbative
definition is provided.
Many interesting theoretical issues remains unsolved for our
higher derivative FORMULA  model. For example, can this theory
incorporate a techni-rho-like resonance in the isospin 1 channel?
This is obviously a nonperturbative problem. To answer it, we have
to extract the phase shift in the isospin 1 channel for the higher
derivative theory. We are still working on this issue.
