
Non-Abelian Gauge Fields as Pseudo-Goldstone Vector
Bosons
J.L. Chkareuli and  J.G. Jejelava
E. Andronikashvili Institute of Physics and 
I. Chavchavadze State University, 0177 Tbilisi, Georgia


Abstract

We argue that non-Abelian gauge fields can be treated as the
pseudo-Goldstone vector bosons caused by spontaneous Lorentz invariance
violation (SLIV). To this end, the SLIV which evolves in a general
Yang-Mills type theory with the nonlinear vector field constraint FORMULA  (FORMULA  is a proposed
SLIV scale) imposed is considered in detail. With an internal symmetry group
FORMULA  having FORMULA  generators not only the pure Lorentz symmetry FORMULA , but
the larger accidental symmetry FORMULA  of the SLIV constraint in itself
appears to be spontaneously broken as well. As a result, while the pure
Lorentz violation still generates only one genuine Goldstone vector boson,
the accompanying pseudo-Goldstone vector bosons related to the FORMULA 
breaking also come into play in the final arrangement of the entire
Goldstone vector field multiplet. Remarkably, they remain strictly massless,
being protected by gauge invariance of the Yang-Mills theory involved. We
show that, although this theory contains a plethora of Lorentz and FORMULA 
violating couplings, they do not lead to physical SLIV effects which turn
out to be strictly cancelled in all the lowest order processes considered.
However, the physical Lorentz violation could appear if  the internal gauge
invariance were slightly broken at very small distances influenced by
gravity. For the SLIV scale comparable with the Planck one the Lorentz
violation could become directly observable at low energies.


Introduction
The old idea{{cite:3a71a3bc-7036-4617-8a75-303f9b8c7b0b}} that spontaneous Lorentz invariance violation
(SLIV) may lead to an alternative theory of quantum electrodynamics still
remains extremely attractive in numerous theoretical contexts{{cite:156e259b-e433-4123-81a8-60ea38f4eea9}}
(for some later developments, see the papers{{cite:d48c2984-87e8-464e-913e-53f2f0356ec0}}). The SLIV could
generally cause the appearance of massless vector Nambu-Goldstone modes
which are identified with photons and other gauge fields underlying the
modern particle physics framework like as Standard Model and Grand Unified
Theory. At the same time, the Lorentz violation by itself has attracted a
considerable attention in recent years as an interesting phenomenological
possibility appearing in various quantum field and string theories[4-9].
Early models realizing the SLIV conjecture were based on the four fermion
(current-current) interaction, where the proposed gauge field may appear as
a fermion-antifermion pair composite state{{cite:3a71a3bc-7036-4617-8a75-303f9b8c7b0b}}, in a complete
analogy with a massless composite scalar field in the original
Nambu-Jona-Lazinio model{{cite:a8dad925-242c-4645-8880-dd82da4a3bef}}. Unfortunately, owing to the lack of a
starting gauge invariance in such models and composite nature of Goldstone
modes appeared it is hard to explicitly demonstrate that these modes really
form together a massless vector boson being a gauge field candidate.
Actually, one must make a precise tuning of parameters, including a
cancellation between terms of different orders in the FORMULA  expansion (where
FORMULA  is the number of fermion species involved), in order to achieve the
massless photon case{{cite:eef918f4-1614-4a63-a6cb-f65bcce8f409}}. Rather, there are in general three separate
massless Goldstone modes, two of which may mimic the transverse photons
polarizations, while the third one must properly be suppressed.
In this connection, the more instructive laboratory for SLIV consideration
proves to be some simple class of the QED type models having from the outset
a gauge invariant form, whereas the Lorentz violation is realized through
the nonlinear dynamical constraint imposed on the starting vector field  FORMULA
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is an properly oriented unit Lorentz vector, while FORMULA  is a
proposed SLIV scale. This constraint means in essence that the vector field FORMULA  develops the vacuum expectation value FORMULA  FORMULA  and Lorentz symmetry FORMULA  breaks down
to FORMULA  or FORMULA  depending on the time-like (FORMULA ) or
space-like (FORMULA ) SLIV. Such QED model was first studied by
Nambu a long time ago{{cite:93d3ea4b-e9b5-4cdb-9aa9-33fcd4f16a2a}}, but only for the time-like SLIV case and
in the tree approximation. For this purpose he applied the technique of
nonlinear symmetry realizations which appeared successful in the handling of
the spontaneous breakdown of chiral symmetry in the nonlinear FORMULA  model{{cite:b6a868c6-25b7-4753-b4f3-9e27d72335fa}} and beyondActually, the simplest possible way to obtain the above supplementary
condition (REF ) could be an inclusion the “standard” quartic vector field potential FORMULA  into the
QED type Lagrangian, as can be motivated to some extent{{cite:b96cb7a0-7522-4319-aadd-56db55bd30b2}} from the
superstring theory. This potential inevitably causes the spontaneous
violation of Lorentz symmetry in a standard way, much as an internal
symmetry violation is caused in a linear FORMULA  model for pions{{cite:b6a868c6-25b7-4753-b4f3-9e27d72335fa}}.
As a result, one has a massive Higgs mode (with mass FORMULA )
together with a massless Goldstone mode associated with photon. Furthermore,
just as in the pion model one can go from the linear model for the SLIV to
the non-linear one taking a limit FORMULA  FORMULA  (while keeping the ratio FORMULA  to be finite). This immediately leads to the constraint (REF )
for vector potential FORMULA  with FORMULA , as it appears from a validity of its equation of motion. Another
motivation for the nonlinear vector field constraint (REF ) might be
an attempt to avoid the infinite self-energy of the electron in a classical
electrodynamics, as was originally indicated by Dirac{{cite:34e89c1d-d9a0-4c68-acc8-f9a4779a81e6}} and extended
later to various vector field theory cases{{cite:ed39c81e-7838-42b4-8417-ec47bdd43eb0}}..
In the present paper, we mainly address ourselves to the Yang-Mills gauge
fields as the possible vector Goldstone modes (Sec.3) once some basic
ingredients of the Goldstonic QED model are established in a general SLIV case (Sec.2). This problem has been discussed many times in the literature
within quite different contexts, such as the Yang-Mills gauge fields as the
Goldstone modes for the spontaneous breaking of general covariance in a
higher-dimensional space{{cite:4516a42b-7f29-4a58-a81c-cc98e6186708}} or for the nonlinear realization of
some special infinite parameter gauge group{{cite:f588df6b-0abe-4b15-8ac7-02e1d4bd1e1c}}. However, all these
considerations look rather speculative and optional. Specifically, they do
not give a correlation between the SLIV induced photon case, from the one
hand, and the Yang-Mills gauge field case, from the other. In contrast, our
approach is solely based on the spontaneous Lorentz violation thus properly
generalizing the Nambu's QED model{{cite:93d3ea4b-e9b5-4cdb-9aa9-33fcd4f16a2a}} to the non-Abelian internal
symmetry case. Just in this approach evolved the interrelation between both
of cases appears most transparent. We will see that in the Yang-Mills theory
case with an internal symmetry group FORMULA  having FORMULA  generators not only the
pure Lorentz symmetry part FORMULA  in the symmetry FORMULA  of
the Lagrangian, but the larger accidental symmetry FORMULA  of the SLIV
constraint FORMULA  in
itself is spontaneously broken as well. Because the starting non-Abelian
theory proves to be expanded about the vacuum which violates the much higher
accidental symmetry appeared, many extra massless modes, the
pseudo-Goldstone vector bosons (PGB), have to arise. Actually, while the
spontaneous Lorentz violation on its own still generates only one genuine
Goldstone vector boson, the accompanying vector PGBs related to the FORMULA  breaking also come into play in the final arrangement of the
entire Goldstone vector field multiplet. Remarkably, in contrast to the
familiar scalar PGB case{{cite:b6a868c6-25b7-4753-b4f3-9e27d72335fa}} the vector PGBs remain strictly massless
being protected by the non-Abelian gauge invariance of the Yang-Mills theory
involved. Then in Sec.4 we show by some examples of the lowest order SLIV
processes that, while the Goldstonic non-Abelian theory evolved contains a
rich variety of Lorentz and FORMULA  violating couplings, it proves to be
physically indistinguishable from a conventional Yang-Mills theory.
Actually, one of the goals of the present work is to explicitly demonstrate
that a conventional Yang-Mills theory (as well as QED) is in fact the
spontaneously broken theory. The Lorentz violation, due to the quadratic
field constraint of the type (REF ), renders this theory highly
nonlinear in the Goldstone vector modes, while physically equivalent to the
usual one. So, as well as in the pure QED case, the SLIV only means the
noncovariant gauge choice in the otherwise gauge invariant and Lorentz
invariant Yang-Mills theory. However, even a tiny breaking of the starting
gauge invariance at very small distances influenced by gravity would render
the SLIV physically significant. For the SLIV scale comparable with the
Planck one the spontaneous Lorentz violation could become directly
observable at low energies. We summarize the results obtained in the final
Sec.5.

Goldstonic quantum electrodynamics
The simplest SLIV model is given by a conventional QED Lagrangian for the
charged fermion field  FORMULA
FORMULA 
where the nonlinear vector field constraint (REF ) is imposed{{cite:93d3ea4b-e9b5-4cdb-9aa9-33fcd4f16a2a}}. For the resulting Lorentz violation, one can rewrite the Lagrangian
FORMULA  in terms of  the standard parametrization for the vector
potential  FORMULA
FORMULA 
where the FORMULA  is pure Goldstonic mode
FORMULA 
while the effective Higgs mode (or the FORMULA  component in the vacuum
direction) is given according to the above nonlinear constraint (REF ) by
FORMULA 
where, for definiteness, the positive sign for the above square root was
taken when expanding it in powers of FORMULA . Putting the
parametrization (REF ) with the SLIV constraint (REF , REF ) into our basic gauge invariant Lagrangian (REF ) one comes
to the truly Goldstonic model for QED. This model might look unacceptable
due to the inappropriately large Lorentz violating fermion bilinear FORMULA  stemming from the vector-fermion
current interaction FORMULA  in the
Lagrangian FORMULA  (REF ) when the expansion (REF ) is taken.
However, thanks to a local invariance of the Lagrangian FORMULA  this term can be
gauged away by a suitable redefinition of the fermion field
FORMULA 
after which the above fermion bilinear is exactly cancelled by an analogous
term stemming from the fermion kinetic term. So, one eventually comes to the
essentially nonlinear SLIV Lagrangian for the Goldstonic FORMULA  field of
the type (taken in the first approximation in FORMULA )
FORMULA 
We denoted its strength tensor by FORMULA , while FORMULA  is a new SLIV oriented differential tensor. This
tensor FORMULA  acts on the infinite series in FORMULA  coming
from the expansion of the effective Higgs mode (REF ) from which
the first order term FORMULA  was only taken in this
expansion throughout the Lagrangian FORMULA . Also, we explicitly
included the orthogonality condition FORMULA  into Lagrangian through
the term which can be treated as the gauge fixing term (taking the limit FORMULA ) and retained the former notation for the
fermion FORMULA .
The Lagrangian (REF ) completes the Goldstonic QED construction for the
charged fermion field FORMULA . The model, as one can see, contains the
massless Goldstone modes given by the tree broken generators of the Lorentz
group, while keeping the massive Higgs mode frozen. These modes, lumped
together, constitute a single Goldstone vector boson associated with photonStrictly speaking one can no longer use the standard definition of photon as
a state being the spin-1 representation of the (now spontaneously broken)
Poincare group. However, due to gauge symmetry of  the starting QED
Lagrangian (REF ) the separate SLIV Goldstone modes appear combined
in such a way that a standard photon (taken in an axial gauge (4)) emerges.. In the limit FORMULA  the model is indistinguishable from a
conventional QED taken in the general axial (temporal or pure axial) gauge.
So, for this part of the Lagrangian FORMULA  given by the zero-order
terms in FORMULA  the spontaneous Lorentz violation only means the noncovariant
gauge choice in otherwise the gauge invariant (and Lorentz invariant)
theory. Remarkably, furthermore, also all the other (first and higher order
in FORMULA ) terms in the FORMULA   (REF ), though being by themselves
the Lorentz and FORMULA  violating ones, do not lead to the physical SLIV
effects which turn out to be strictly cancelled in all the physical
processes involved. So, the nonlinear constraint (REF ) imposed on
the standard QED Lagrangian (REF ) appears, in fact, as a possible
gauge choice, while the FORMULA -matrix remains unaltered under such a gauge
convention. This conclusion was first reached at tree level{{cite:93d3ea4b-e9b5-4cdb-9aa9-33fcd4f16a2a}} and
recently extended to the one-loop approximation{{cite:5b8fd207-07de-4c67-8fd9-7197eba0d81f}}. All the one-loop
contributions to the photon-photon, photon-fermion and fermion-fermion
interactions violating the physical Lorentz invariance were shown to be
exactly cancelled as well. This means that the vector field constraint FORMULA  which has been treated as the nonlinear
gauge choice at a tree (classical) level, remains just as a pure gauge
condition when quantum effects are also taken into account. Remarkably, this
conclusion appears to work also for a general Abelian theory case{{cite:c9d63307-805d-476f-bc8c-0755f797e44e}},
particularly, when the internal FORMULA  charge symmetry is spontaneously
broken hand in hand with the Lorentz one. As a result, the massless photon
being first generated by the Lorentz violation become then massive due to
the standard Higgs mechanism, while the SLIV condition in itself remains to
be a gauge choiceNote in this connection that there was discussed{{cite:93d3ea4b-e9b5-4cdb-9aa9-33fcd4f16a2a}} a possibility
of an explicit construction of the gauge function corresponding to the
nonlinear gauge constraint (1) that would eliminate the need for all the
kinds of checks of gauge invariance mentioned above. Remarkably, the
equation for this gauge function appears to be mathematically equivalent to
the classical Hamilton-Jacobi equation of motion for a charged particle.
Thus, this gauge function should in principle exist because there is a
solution to the classical problem. However, this formal analogy only works
for the time-like SLIV (FORMULA ) in the pure QED leaving aside a
general Abelian theory when the gauge invariance can spontaneously be
broken. Apart from that, it does not generally extend to the non-Abelian
case (see next Section)..

Goldstonic Yang-Mills theory
In this section, we extend our discussion to the non-Abelian internal
symmetry case given by a general group FORMULA  with generators FORMULA (FORMULA  and FORMULA  where FORMULA  are structure constants and FORMULA ). The
corresponding vector fields which transform according to its adjoint
representation are given in the proper matrix form FORMULA , while the matter fields (fermions, for definiteness)
are presented in the fundamental representation column FORMULA 
(FORMULA ) of FORMULA . By analogy with the above Goldstonic QED case we
take for them a conventional Yang-Mills type Lagrangian
FORMULA 
(where FORMULA  and FORMULA  stands for the universal coupling constant
in the theory) with the nonlinear SLIV constraint
FORMULA 
imposedAs in the Abelian case, the existence of such a constraint could be related
with some nonlinear FORMULA  type SLIV model proposed for the vector field
multiplet FORMULA  in the Yang-Mills theory (REF ). Note in this
connection that, due to its generic antisymmetry, the familiar quadrilinear
terms FORMULA  in the Lagrangian (REF ) do not contribute into the SLIV
since they identically vanish for any single-valued vacuum configuration FORMULA ..  One can easily see that,
although we propose only the FORMULA  invariance in the theory, the
SLIV constraint taken (REF ) possesses, in fact, the much higher
accidental symmetry FORMULA  determined by the dimensionality FORMULA  of the FORMULA  group adjoint representation to which the vector fields FORMULA 
are belonged. This symmetry is indeed spontaneously broken at a scale  FORMULA
FORMULA 
with the vacuum direction given now by the `unit' rectangular matrix FORMULA  which describes both of the generalized SLIV cases
at once, time-like (FORMULA  FORMULA ) or space-like (FORMULA  FORMULA ), respectively, depending on the sign of
the FORMULA . This matrix has only one non-zero element for both of cases
determined by the proper FORMULA  rotation. They are, particularly, FORMULA  or FORMULA  provided that the vacuum
expectation value (REF ) is developed along the FORMULA  direction in the
internal space and along the FORMULA  or FORMULA  direction, respectively,
in the Minkowskian space-time. In response to each of these two breakings,
side by side with one true vector Goldstone boson and the FORMULA  scalar
Goldstone bosons corresponding to the spontaneous violation of actual FORMULA  symmetry of the total Lagrangian FORMULA ,  the FORMULA  vector pseudo-Goldstone bosons related to breaking of the accidental FORMULA  symmetry of the SLIV constraint taken (REF ) are also
produced. Remarkably, in contrast to the familiar scalar PGB case{{cite:b6a868c6-25b7-4753-b4f3-9e27d72335fa}}
the vector PGBs remain strictly massless being protected by the non-Abelian
gauge invariance of the starting Lagrangian (REF ). Together with the
aforementioned true vector Goldstone boson they complete the entire
Goldstonic vector field multiplet of the internal symmetry group FORMULA .
As in the Abelian case, upon an explicit use of the corresponding SLIV
constraint (REF ) being so far the only supplementary condition for
vector field multiplet FORMULA , one comes to the pure Goldstone field
modes FORMULA  identified in a similar way
FORMULA 
At the same time, an effective Higgs mode (i.e., the FORMULA 
component in the vacuum direction FORMULA ) is given by the
product FORMULA 
determined by the SLIV constraint
FORMULA 
where, as earlier in the Abelian case, we took the positive sign for the
square root when expanding it in powers of FORMULA . Note
that the general Goldstonic modes FORMULA , apart from pure vector
fields, contain the FORMULA  scalar ones, FORMULA  and FORMULA  (FORMULA ), for the time-like (FORMULA ) and space-like (FORMULA ) SLIV,
respectively. They can be eliminated from the theory if one puts the proper
supplementary conditions on the FORMULA  fields which were still the
constraint free. Using their overall orthogonality (REF ) to the
physical vacuum direction FORMULA  one can formulate these
supplementary conditions in terms of a general axial gauge for the entire FORMULA  multiplet
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the unit Lorentz vector introduced in the Abelian case
which is now oriented in Minkowskian space-time so as to be parallel to the
vacuum matrix FORMULA . For such a choice the simple
equation holds
FORMULA 
which shows that the rectangular vacuum matrix FORMULA  has
the factorized "two-vector" form. As a result, apart from the Higgs mode
excluded earlier by the orthogonality condition (REF ), all the scalar
fields also appear eliminated, and only pure vector fields, FORMULA  (FORMULA ) or FORMULA  (FORMULA ) for time-like or space-like SLIV, respectively,
are only left in the theory.
We now show that the such constrained Goldstone vector fields FORMULA 
(with the supplementary conditions (REF ) taken) appear truly
massless when the starting non-Abelian Lagrangian FORMULA  (REF )
is rewritten in the form determined by the SLIV. Actually, putting the
parametrization (REF ) with the SLIV constraint (REF ) into
the Lagrangian (REF ) one is led to the highly nonlinear Yang-Mills
theory in terms of the pure Goldstonic gauge field modes FORMULA .
However, as in the above Abelian case, one should first gauge away (using
the local invariance of the Lagrangian FORMULA ) the enormously large,
while false, Lorentz violating terms appearing in the theory in the form of
the fermion and vector field bilinears. As one can readily see, they stem
from the couplings FORMULA   and FORMULA , respectively, when the effective Higgs mode
expansion (REF ) is taken in the Lagrangian (REF ). Making
the appropriate redefinitions of the fermion (FORMULA  ) and
vector (FORMULA ) field multiplets
FORMULA 
and using the evident equalities for the linear (in coordinate)
transformations FORMULA  with the single-valued vacuum matrix FORMULA  (FORMULA  or FORMULA  for the
particular SLIV cases)
FORMULA 
one can confirm that the abovementioned Lorentz violating terms are exactly
cancelled with the analogous bilinears stemming from their kinetic terms.
So, the final Lagrangian for the Goldstonic Yang-Mills theory takes the form
(in the first approximation in FORMULA )
FORMULA 
where the tensor FORMULA  is, as usual, FORMULA , while FORMULA  is a new SLIV oriented tensor of the
type
FORMULA 
This tensor FORMULA  acts on the infinite series in FORMULA  coming from the expansion of the effective Higgs mode (REF ) from which only the first order term FORMULA  was taken throughout the Lagrangian FORMULA . We also retained the former notations
for the fermion and vector field multiplets after transformations (REF ),  and explicitly included the (axial) gauge fixing term into Lagrangian
according to the supplementary conditions taken (REF ).
The theory derived gives a proper generalization of the nonlinear QED model{{cite:93d3ea4b-e9b5-4cdb-9aa9-33fcd4f16a2a}} for the non-Abelian case. It contains the massless vector boson
multiplet FORMULA  (consisting of one Goldstone and FORMULA 
pseudo-Goldstone vector states) which gauges the starting internal symmetry FORMULA . In the limit FORMULA   it is indistinguishable from a
conventional Yang-Mills theory taken in the general axial gauge. So, for
this part of the Lagrangian FORMULA 
given by the zero-order in FORMULA  terms the spontaneous Lorentz violation
only means the noncovariant gauge choice in the otherwise gauge invariant
(and Lorentz invariant) theory. However, one may expect that, just as it
appears in the nonlinear QED model, also all the first and higher order in FORMULA  terms in the FORMULA  (REF ), though being by themselves
the Lorentz and FORMULA  violating ones, do not lead to the physical SLIV
effects due to the mutual cancellation of their contributions into all the
physical processes appeared.

The lowest order SLIV processes
Let us now show that the simple tree level calculations related to the
Lagrangian FORMULA  confirms in
essence this proposition. As an illustration, we consider SLIV processes in
the lowest order in FORMULA  and FORMULA   being the fundamental parameters of the
Lagrangian (REF ). They are, as one can readily see, the
vector-fermion and vector-vector elastic scattering going in the order FORMULA , which we turn to once the Feynman rules in the Goldstonic Yang-Mills
theory are established.
Feynman rules
The corresponding Feynman rules, apart from the ordinary Yang-Mills theory
rules for
(i) the vector-fermion vertex  FORMULA
FORMULA 
(ii) the vector field propagator (taken in a general axial gauge FORMULA )
FORMULA 
which automatically satisfies the orthogonality condition FORMULA  and on-shell transversality FORMULA 
FORMULA  (FORMULA ); the latter means that free vector fields with polarization
vector FORMULA  are always appeared transverse FORMULA ;
(iii) the 3-vector vertex (with vector field 4-momenta FORMULA  FORMULA  and FORMULA ; all 4-momenta in vertexes are taken ingoing throughout)  FORMULA
FORMULA 
 include the new ones, violating Lorentz and FORMULA  invariance, for
(iv) the contact 2-vector-fermion vertex  FORMULA
FORMULA 
(v) another 3-vector vertex
FORMULA 
where the second index in the vector field 4-momenta FORMULA  FORMULA  and FORMULA  denotes their Lorentz components;
(vi) the extra 4-vector vertex (with the vector field 4-momenta FORMULA 
and their proper differences FORMULA   etc.)
FORMULA 
where only the terms which can not lead to contractions of the rectangular
vacuum matrix FORMULA  with vector field polarization
vectors FORMULA  are presented. These contractions are in
fact vanished due to the gauge taken (REF ), FORMULA  FORMULA  (with a factorized
two-vector form for the matrix FORMULA  (REF ) used).
Just the rules (i-vi) are needed to calculate the lowest order amplitudes of
the processes we have mentioned in the above.

Vector boson scattering on fermion
This process is directly related to two SLIV diagrams one of which is given
by the contact FORMULA -fermion vertex (REF ), while another
corresponds to the pole diagram with the longitudinal FORMULA -boson exchange
between Lorentz violatingFORMULA  vertex (REF ) and ordinary FORMULA -boson-fermion one (REF ). Since ingoing and outgoing FORMULA -bosons
appear transverse (FORMULA , FORMULA ) only the third term in this FORMULA  coupling (REF )
contributes to the pole diagram so that one comes to a simple matrix element
FORMULA  for both of diagrams
FORMULA 
where the spinors FORMULA  and polarization vectors FORMULA  and FORMULA  stand for the ingoing and
outgoing fermions and FORMULA -bosons, respectively, while FORMULA  is the 4-momentum
transfer FORMULA . Upon the further simplifications in
the square bracket related to the explicit form of the FORMULA  boson propagator FORMULA  (REF ) and matrix FORMULA  (REF ), and using the fermion current conservation FORMULA , one is finally led to the total cancellation of
the Lorentz violating contributions to the FORMULA -boson-fermion scattering in
the FORMULA  approximation.
Note, however, that such a result may be in some sense expected since from
the SLIV point of view the lowest order FORMULA -boson-fermion scattering
discussed here is hardly distinct from the photon-fermion scattering
considered in the nonlinear QED case{{cite:93d3ea4b-e9b5-4cdb-9aa9-33fcd4f16a2a}}. Actually, the fermion
current conservation which happens to be crucial for the above cancellation
works in both of cases, whereas the couplings being peculiar to the
Yang-Mills theory have not yet touched on. In this connection the next
example seems to be more instructive.

Vector-vector scattering
The matrix element for this process in the lowest order FORMULA  is given by
the contact SLIV FORMULA  vertex (REF ) and the pole diagrams with the
longitudinal FORMULA -boson exchange between the ordinaryFORMULA  vertex (REF ) and Lorentz violating FORMULA  one (REF ), and vice versa.
There are six pole diagrams in total describing the elastic FORMULA  scattering
in the FORMULA - and FORMULA -channels, respectively, including also those with an
interchange of identical FORMULA -bosons. Remarkably, the contribution of each of
them is exactly canceled with one of six terms appeared in the contact
vertex (REF ). Actually, writing down the matrix element for one of
the pole diagrams with ingoing FORMULA -bosons (with momenta FORMULA  and FORMULA )
interacting through the vertex (REF ) and outgoing FORMULA -bosons (with
momenta FORMULA  and FORMULA ) interacting through the vertex (REF ) one
has
FORMULA 
where polarization vectors FORMULA , FORMULA , FORMULA  and FORMULA  belong, respectively, to ingoing and outgoing FORMULA -bosons, while FORMULA  according to the momentum running in the
diagrams taken above. Again, as in the previous case of vector-fermion
scattering, due to the fact that outgoing FORMULA -bosons appear transverse (FORMULA  and FORMULA ),
only the third term in the Lorentz violating FORMULA  coupling (REF )
contributes to this pole diagram. Upon evident simplifications related to
the FORMULA -boson propagator FORMULA  (REF ) and matrix FORMULA  (REF ) one comes to the expression which is
exactly cancelled with the first term in the contact SLIV vertex (REF ) when it is properly contracted with FORMULA -boson polarization vectors.
Likewise, other terms in this vertex provide the further one-to-one
cancellation with the remaining pole matrix elements FORMULA . So, again, the Lorentz violating contribution to the
vector-vector scattering is absent in Goldstonic Yang-Mills theory in the
lowest FORMULA  approximation.

Other processes
Other tree level Lorentz violating processes, related to FORMULA  bosons and
fermions, appear in higher orders in the basic SLIV parameter FORMULA . They
come from the subsequent expansion of the effective Higgs mode (REF ) in the Lagrangian (REF ). Again, their amplitudes are
essentially determined by an interrelation between the longitudinal FORMULA -boson exchange diagrams and the corresponding contact FORMULA -boson interaction
diagrams which appear to cancel each other thus eliminating physical Lorentz
violation in theory.
Most likely, the same conclusion can be derived for SLIV loop contributions
as well. Actually, as in the massless QED case considered earlier {{cite:5b8fd207-07de-4c67-8fd9-7197eba0d81f}},
the corresponding one-loop matrix elements in Goldstonic Yang-Mills theory
either vanish by themselves or amount to the differences between pairs of
the similar integrals whose integration variables are shifted relative to
each other by some constants (being in general arbitrary functions of
external four-momenta of the particles involved) that in the framework of
dimensional regularization leads to their total cancellation.
So, the Goldstonic vector field theory (REF ) for a non-Abelian
charge-carrying matter is likely to be physically indistinguishable from a
conventional Yang-Mills theory.

Conclusion
The spontaneous Lorentz violation in 4-dimensonal flat Minkowskian
space-time was shown to generate vector Goldstone bosons both in Abelian and
non-Abelian theories with the corresponding nonlinear vector field
constraint (REF ) or (REF ) imposed. In the Abelian case such a
massless vector boson is naturally associated with photon. In non-Abelian  case, although the pure  Lorentz violation still generates only one genuine
Goldstone vector boson, the accompanying vector PGBs related to a violation
of the larger accidental symmetry FORMULA  of the SLIV constraint (REF ) in itself come also into play in the final arrangement of the entire
Goldstone vector field multiplet of the internal symmetry group FORMULA .
Remarkably, they remain strictly massless being protected by the gauge
invariance of the Yang-Mills theory involved. These theories, both Abelian
and non-Abelian, while being essentially nonlinear in the Goldstone vector
modes, are physically indistinguishable from conventional QED and Yang-Mills
theory. One could actually see that just the gauge invariance not only
provides these theories to be free from the unreasonably large Lorentz
violation stemming from the fermion and vector field bilinears (see Sections
2 and 3), but also render all the other physical SLIV effects (including
those which are suppressed by the Lorentz violation scale FORMULA )
non-observable (Section 4). As a result, Abelian and non-Abelian SLIV theory
appear, respectively, as standard QED and Yang-Mills theory taken in the
nonlinear gauge (to which the vector field constraints (REF ) and (REF ) are virtually reduced), while the FORMULA -matrix remains unaltered
under such a gauge convention.
So, while at present the Goldstonic nature of gauge fields, both Abelian and
non-Abelian, seems to be highly plausible, the most fundamental question of
physical Lorentz violation in itself, that only could uniquely point toward
such a possibility, is still an open question. Note, that here we are not
dealing with direct (and quite arbitrary in essence) Lorentz non-invariant
extensions of QED or Standard Model which were intensively discussed on
their own in recent years [6-8]. Rather, the case in point is a construction
of genuine SLIV models which would generate gauge fields as the proper
vector Goldstone bosons, from one hand, and could lead to observed Lorentz
violating effects, from the other. In this connection, somewhat natural
framework for physical Lorentz violation to occur would be a model where  the internal gauge invariance were slightly broken at very small distances
through some high-order operators stemming from the gravity-influenced area.
Such physical SLIV effects would be seen in terms of powers of ratio FORMULA  (where FORMULA  is the Planck mass). So, for the SLIV scale
comparable with the Planck one they would become directly observable.
Remarkably enough, if one has such internal gauge symmetry breaking in an
ordinary Lorentz invariant theory this breaking appears vanishingly small at
laboratory being properly suppressed by the Planck scale. However, the
spontaneous Lorentz violation would render it physically significant: the
higher Lorentz scale, the greater SLIV effects observed. If true, it would
be of particular interest to have a better understanding of the internal
gauge symmetry breaking mechanism that brings out the spontaneous Lorentz
violation at low energies. We return to this basic question elsewhere.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Colin Froggatt, Rabi Mohapatra and Holger Nielsen for
useful discussions and comments. One of us (J.L.C.) is grateful for the warm
hospitality shown to him during a visit to Center for Particle and String
Theory at University of Maryland where part of this work was carried out.
