
Probing extra dimensions with higher dimensional black hole analogues?
[apctp]Xian-Hui Ge   
[apctp,kun]Sung-Won Kim
[apctp]Asia-Pacific Center for Theoretical Physics,
Pohang 790-784, Korea 
[kun]
Department of Science Education, Ewha Woman's University, Seoul
120-750, Korea
e-mail:gexh@www.apctp.org

     We propose that extra dimensions might be detected with higher
dimensional analogues of black holes. The usual 4-dimensional
acoustic(sonic)black hole metric is extended to arbitrary
dimensions. The absorption cross-section of Hawking radiation on
the brane and in the bulk are calculated in the semiclassical
approximation.
PACS: 04.70.-s, 04.50.+h
Introduction
     A lot of interest in recent years has been raised for
field theories where the standard model of high-energy physics is
assumed to live on a 3-brane embedded in a larger space-time, while
only the gravitational fields are in contrast usually considered to
live in the whole spacetime {{cite:17721b34-2f8e-4eee-8e01-9ab666d781cd}}, {{cite:22e3857a-664f-4daf-b858-599ef8cd5737}}, {{cite:bcba956c-49a7-47e2-942d-931e687fc0e3}}, {{cite:8e08e38a-dc93-43ad-9d19-5c5773fc0e90}}.
Arkani-Hamed et al {{cite:22e3857a-664f-4daf-b858-599ef8cd5737}}, proposed a new framework
for solving the hierarchy problem which does not rely on
supersymmetry or techi-color. The novelty in this idea was that the
traditional picture of Planck-length-sized additional spacelike
dimensions (FORMULA cm) was abandoned, and the extra
dimensions could have a size as large as 1 mm. The fact that we do
not see experimental signs of the extra dimensions despite that the
compactification scale of the extra dimensions FORMULA  would have to be much smaller than the weak scale,
implies that only gravity can propagate in the extra-dimensional
spacetime and all ordinary matter: electromagnetic, weak and strong
forces, is restricted to live on a (3+1) dimensional hypersurfaces,
a 3-brane.
           The presence of extra dimensions in brane world
gravity models will inevitably change the properties and physics of
black holes. In brane-world scenario, the production cross-section
for black holes is greatly enhanced. Detectable signals of black
holes might be found via Hawking evaporation to brane-localized
modes. If the scale of quantum gravity is near a Tev, the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) will become a “black hole factory” {{cite:429dc39a-f08c-46e6-908c-f80a354c03a1}}.
The correlations between the black hole
mass and its temperature, deduced from the energy spectrum of the
decay products, can test Hawking's evaporation law. The absorption cross-section
(and also grey body factors) of black holes in different physical scenario have been
investigated by several authors{{cite:c483715b-5ef6-4d70-a365-bed9494f643a}}, {{cite:4b4e5e52-f699-49c9-a6b2-cefd88f1c35c}}, {{cite:3741ef3a-eb53-4ce1-8181-6df7ed4b113a}}, {{cite:4a3ed42c-7f30-4d19-bb3d-75b90f266453}}, {{cite:772ad107-56e1-4cbf-8cff-da650dd20705}}. The
emission rate of 4-dimensional acoustic black holes for FORMULA  wave has
been studied in Ref.{{cite:f7f8e11f-005d-42e8-8875-ff6001ed4f55}}. In this paper,
we would like to investigate the absorption cross-section of higher dimensional acoustic black holes.
     The remarkable work of Unruh, in 1981, developed a
way of mapping certain aspects of black holes in supersonic flows
and pointed out that propagation of sound in a fluid or gas turning
supersonic {{cite:6962c709-bcdd-499e-a637-0bbcdb8dd9cf}}, is similar to the propagation of a scalar
field close to a black hole, and thus experimental investigation of
the Hawking radiation is possible. From then on, several candidates
have been considered for the experimental test of the analogue of
black holes {{cite:f5208de5-4503-4f18-8205-9b768cc0b9e3}}.
     In the present study, we extend 4-dimensional
acoustic black hole metric into arbitrary dimensional space-time in
Section 2. Then following the methods of Ref.{{cite:4a3ed42c-7f30-4d19-bb3d-75b90f266453}},
we calculate the corresponding absorption probabilities and
energy emission rates of such black hole analogues. In section 3, we present the calculation of
bulk emission in FORMULA -dimensions for FORMULA  case by using the
low energy perturbation method. Section 4 performs the calculation
of brane-localized scalar emission, where the brane is embedded in a
FORMULA -dimensional bulk. We give the conclusions in Section 5.

Metric of higher dimensional black hole analogues
     Since the dynamics of effective black hole analogues
metric are not described by the laws of gravity (i.e. Einstein
equations) in general, to extend the four dimensional effective
metric we should start with the equations of fluid dynamics. We
consider one kind of fluids which is permitted to propagate in
FORMULA -dimensional space-time. The fluid might be condensate states
of gravitons or some higher-dimensional scalar particles. In the
following of our discussions, we simply neglect quantum effects of
such special quantum fluids and assume they obey the classical
fluids equation (Euler equation) in the low energy approximation.
The fundamental equations of fluid dynamics in FORMULA -dimensional
flat spacetime are the equation of continuity
FORMULA 
and Euler's equations
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA , and FORMULA . Here FORMULA  denotes the Newtonian gravitational
potential. It is also assumed that the fluid to be irrotational and
inviscid, which imply FORMULA . These equations can
be linearized in the vicinity of some mean flow solution with
FORMULA ,
FORMULA ,FORMULA , redefining the fields as
FORMULA , and FORMULA . One
can finally obtain the wave equation {{cite:178dc988-ae29-45f3-967c-da68101fe488}},
FORMULA 
The above equation is identified with a massless scalar field
equation describing the sound wave in the curved spacetime
background
FORMULA 
with the background metric,
FORMULA , which is a FORMULA  matrix, where
the local speed of sound is defined by FORMULA , and FORMULA .
In spherical coordinates, assuming FORMULA ,
FORMULA , we then have
FORMULA 
which is similar to the FORMULA -dimensional Schwarzschild
black hole metric {{cite:a89d2d91-0555-4b5c-b615-f164c669a54b}},
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the light velocity and FORMULA  is the event horizon radius.
The properties of higher dimensional Schwarzschild
black holes in brane-world scenario have been discussed in
Ref.{{cite:4f7de4e8-1552-4c52-ae4e-25c92c19c863}}. However, the properties of acoustic black holes do
not necessarily relate to the outside geometry of space-time since the dynamics of
acoustic black holes do not obey Einstein equation.
In Ref.{{cite:3e536df9-fbc5-4b08-bce5-19d92ff283a6}}, we have discussed black hole analogues
in brane-world scenario under some assumptions and found the
properties of acoustic black holes in brane-world scenario are similar to real black holes.
If FORMULA  is time and position independent, the continuity equation FORMULA  then
implies that FORMULA . Because of the barotropic assumption, FORMULA  is position independent
implying the pressure FORMULA  and the speed of sound FORMULA  are also position independent. We can define a normalization
constant FORMULA  and set FORMULA  with FORMULA . FORMULA  is a parameter which can be determined
by experiments. The metric can be
rewritten as
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA .
The temperature of an acoustic(sonic) black hole
is given by FORMULA , where FORMULA  marks the exact position of the event horizon. For 4-dimensional cases,
FORMULA , we have the numerical
expression,
FORMULA 
For (4+n)-dimensional cases,
FORMULA , the temperature can then be
written as
FORMULA 
     It is clear from the above equations that unless FORMULA  is very large (i.e. to be the velocity of light FORMULA 
m/sec),
the experimental verification of above acoustic
Hawking temperature will be rather difficult. However, the higher
dimensional black hole analogue metric presents us an
alternative way to detect extra dimensions other than in LHC. By detecting signals via
the acoustic black hole's evaporation to brane-localized modes,
one can in principle determine the exact dimensions of space-time.
However, since the Standard Model particles must to be located to
an ordinary 4-dimensional spacetime, extra dimensions can only be
probed through the gravitational force. The continuity equation
FORMULA  in higher dimensions should only
apply to gravitational waves or some unknown scalar particles.

Bulk scalar emission: S wave and FORMULA  
     In this section and the next section, we shall
calculate the decay rate of higher dimensional acoustic black holes
from the near-horizon low energy dynamics, which is expected to give
an experimental suggestion of detecting
the thermal radiation.
      The radiation of higher dimensional acoustic black
holes is usually described as thermal spectrum in character with a
temperature FORMULA . The energy emitted per unit time (power
spectrum) by gravity-wave black hole analogues for a higher number
of dimensions can be given by
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the angular momentum quantum number and
FORMULA  for massless particles. However, considering the
nontrivial metric in the region exterior to the horizon, there
exists an effective potential barrier in this exterior region. This
potential barrier backscatters a part of the outgoing radiation back
into the black hole. Thus the original blackbody radiation is
modified by a frequency dependent filtering function
FORMULA , caused by the gravitational potential of the
black hole, which is called the “greybody factor". Greybody factors
are important theoretically and experimentally in that they depend
on the number of extra dimensions and encode information on the
near-horizon structure of black holes and can be used to identify a
black hole event.
     For S wave bulk scalar emission of the
FORMULA -dimensional gravity-wave black hole analogues, the
calculation is similar to that of higher dimensional Schwarzschild
cases. The calculations do not depend on the concrete form of the
metric. In fact, it has been proved that all spherically symmetric
black holes, regardless of the theory in which they arise, the low
energy cross section for massless minimally coupled scalars is
always the area of the horizon {{cite:d7ef0e57-ed15-459d-aaf1-ceaae8e9b510}}. Following the method of
Ref. {{cite:772ad107-56e1-4cbf-8cff-da650dd20705}}, we can obtain the spherical wave absorption
probability,
FORMULA 
The greybody factor can be computed by first evaluating the
absorption probability, FORMULA , from
the ratio of the in-going flux at the future horizon to the incoming
flux from past infinity with boundary condition that there is no
outgoing flux at the horizon, and then using the generalized
(FORMULA )-dimensional optical theorem relation {{cite:511825e1-3244-4574-b383-4cd01455e5b8}}
FORMULA 
between the absorption cross section FORMULA  and the
absorption probability FORMULA  for the
l-th partial waves.
     We will then derive the scalar decay modes which are
not spherically symmetric, FORMULA . We start with the
FORMULA -dimensional black hole analogue by rewriting
Eq.(REF ) in the following form,
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  and we have
assumed FORMULA . The scalar wave equation in this background
is separable if we make the ansatz
FORMULA ,
where FORMULA  are now the FORMULA -spatial dimensional
spherical harmonic functions. We can then obtain the radial part
equation by substituting the above ansatz into the Eq.(REF ),
which reads,
FORMULA 
The idea of  {{cite:4b4e5e52-f699-49c9-a6b2-cefd88f1c35c}} is to solve this equation approximately in
three regions: near-horizon regions, far field regions and
intermediate regions, and match the solution across the boundaries
of the regions. We will use the same method here, but simply solve
the radial equation in near-horizon and far field regions, and
assume that keep only the lowest order terms in FORMULA  in each
region is enough. From the change of variables FORMULA , we can write the scalar field equation Eq.(REF )
in the form,
FORMULA 
where we set FORMULA  to be FORMULA  near the horizon. By redefining
FORMULA  and removing singularities at
FORMULA  and FORMULA , the above equation can be reduced to a
hypergeometric equation with FORMULA ,
FORMULA  and FORMULA , where,
FORMULA 
Thus, we have,
FORMULA 
which has a solution the hypergeometric function
FORMULA  {{cite:e64ca43b-b8f7-470a-9119-5eae37a80449}}. The criterion for the convergence of the
hypergeometric function demands that FORMULA , which force us
to choose FORMULA . Then, the general solution of
Eq.() is,
FORMULA 
Expanding the above solution in the near-horizon region in the limit FORMULA , or FORMULA , and choosing FORMULA , we
obtain the result,
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is defined by FORMULA . To calculate the greybody factor, we must impose the
boundary condition that near the horizon the solution is purely
ingoing and then we set FORMULA  {{cite:4a3ed42c-7f30-4d19-bb3d-75b90f266453}}.
     By using the FORMULA  transformation of
hypergeometric functions,
FORMULA 
the near-horizon solution (REF ) expanded in terms of FORMULA  is
given by,
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  has been set to vanish. Expanding the above expression in the limit FORMULA , we get,
FORMULA 
     The derivation of the far-field zone which is defined
by FORMULA . In this limit, FORMULA  and, by setting
FORMULA , Eq.(REF ) can be rewritten as
FORMULA 
which is a FORMULA -th order Bessel equation. The
solution of the above equation are the Bessel functions
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  and FORMULA  are the Bessel functions of
the first and second kind, respectively. For small FORMULA ,
we can expand the above formula into,
FORMULA 
In order to match the solutions across the boundaries of
near-horizon field and far-field zone, we need to rewrite the
near-horizon solution in terms of (FORMULA ), before expanding the
solution in the limit FORMULA . Matching the two solutions
Eqs.(REF ) and (REF ), we obtain the ratio,
FORMULA 
 FIGUREAnalytical results for the absorption probability for a
FORMULA -dimensional bulk scalar field for FORMULA , where FORMULA  and FORMULA .

 FIGUREAnalytical results for the energy rates for scalars from a
FORMULA -dimensional black hole in the bulk for FORMULA , where
FORMULA  and FORMULA .

The ingoing and outgoing waves of Eq.(REF ) can be decomposed
by introducing the redefinition of amplitudes. We expand
Eq.(REF ) in the limit FORMULA , and then we
obtain,
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  and FORMULA  is defined by,
FORMULA 
The reflection coefficient FORMULA  is defined as the ratio of
the outgoing amplitude over the incoming amplitude at infinity,
FORMULA 
The absorption probability can be written, in terms of
FORMULA , as
FORMULA 
In the limit of FORMULA  and FORMULA , the absorption probability can approximately be written as
FORMULA 
     From Figure 1, we can see that if we fix the angular
momentum number and vary only the number of extra dimensions, the
absorption probability decreases as FORMULA  increases, since the
expansions of FORMULA  is in powers of FORMULA . Thus, FORMULA  should become more
and more suppressed as FORMULA  increases. The same behavior is observed
if we fix instead FORMULA  and vary FORMULA .
     According to Figure 2, the emission rate of scalar
fields in the bulk is enhanced as the number of extra dimensions
increases. This is caused by the increase of the temperature of
gravity-wave black hole analogues, which finally overcome the
decreases in the value of the greybody factor and causes the
enhancement of the emission rate with FORMULA  at high energies.

Brane-localized scalar emission for  FORMULA
     If the acoustic black hole is formed from matter on
the brane, the scalar field is confined on the 3-brane embedded in a
FORMULA -dimensional space-time. The induced metric on the brane will
be,
FORMULA 
where FORMULA . on the brane, the event
horizon is still at FORMULA  and its area is FORMULA .
This induced acoustic metric on the brane is certainly not the
4-dimensional acoustic geometry. The calculation of Hawking
radiation relies on mainly on properties of the horizon, such as its
surface gravity. We shall calculate the absorption cross-section of
the brane-localized scalar field, which according to
Ref.{{cite:d512394f-e001-4e9f-8909-05e4d4ecbfe9}}, most of the energy radiated by black holes goes
into modes on the brane. Using the separation of variables,
FORMULA ,
where FORMULA  are now the usual three-dimensional spherical
harmonic functions, the radial equation of Eq.(REF ) is
written as,
FORMULA 
Similar to the discussions in section 3, we solve this equation in
two regions: the near-horizon region and far-field region.
Our starting point is the Klein-Gordon equation under the
near-horizon metric background.
In terms of FORMULA , the radial differential equation now takes the
form,
FORMULA 
If we further define FORMULA  to remove
singularities at points FORMULA  and FORMULA , the above equation assumes
the standard form of a hypergeometric equation
FORMULA 
with indices
FORMULA ,FORMULA  and
FORMULA , where FORMULA  and
FORMULA .
The criterion for the convergence of the horizon and imposing the
boundary condition that only incoming waves exist near FORMULA , one can find that FORMULA  for FORMULA . To
express the form of the solution for small FORMULA , we express the
FORMULA  in terms of FORMULA , by using the hypergeometric relation
Eq.(REF ). Thus after expanding FORMULA  for FORMULA , we find that the desired solution for near-horizon region is
FORMULA 
For the far-field region which is defined by FORMULA , noting
that FORMULA  and setting FORMULA , we rewrite
Eq.(REF ) as,
FORMULA 
The far field region solution can be expressed in terms of the
Bessel function FORMULA  and Neumann function
FORMULA ,
FORMULA 
At this stage, we expand the general solution Eq.(REF ),
in the low energy limit FORMULA  and find that,
FORMULA 
Matching the solution Eq.(REF ) with (REF ), we obtain the
ratio,
FORMULA 
We can now compute the absorption probability FORMULA  in the low energy limit FORMULA , which goes as,
FORMULA 
     Figure 3 demonstrates that if we keep FORMULA  fixed and
varying FORMULA , the absorption probability decreases as FORMULA  increases.
The dominant term becomes more and more suppressed by extra powers
of FORMULA  and its numerical coefficients also decreases. If we fix
instead FORMULA  and vary FORMULA , a different behavior from the one observed
in the case with a bulk scalar field emerges, that is to say the
leading term remains the same since it is FORMULA -independent. Figure 4
is to compare the results of the absorption probability derived in
the case of a brane-localized FORMULA  scalar field with a purely
4-dimensional FORMULA  scalar field. For higher partial waves
FORMULA , the value of the absorption probability in the case of a
brane-localized FORMULA  scalar field is larger than the one for a
purely 4-dimensional FORMULA  field, while for FORMULA  they are the
same.
 FIGUREAnalytical results for the absorption probability for a FORMULA 
black holes analogues on the brane for FORMULA , where FORMULA 
and FORMULA .

 FIGUREAnalytical results for the absorption probability for a
FORMULA  black holes analogues on the brane for FORMULA , where
FORMULA  and FORMULA .

 FIGUREAnalytical results for the energy rates for scalars from
a FORMULA -dimensional black hole on the brane for FORMULA , where
FORMULA  and FORMULA .

Figure 5 depicts the behavior
of the energy emission rates for particles with the angular number
FORMULA  in the low and intermediate energy regime. The figure shows
that the energy and the number of particles, emitted per unit time
and energy interval is strongly enhanced, as FORMULA  increases since the
temperature of the black hole is given by the relation
FORMULA , which indicates that for fixed
FORMULA , the temperature of the gravity-wave black hole analogues
increases as FORMULA  increases. This means the energy of the emission
particles also increases.

Conclusions
     In summary, we have extended the 4-dimensional
acoustic black hole metric to higher dimensions that is similar to
higher dimensional Schwarzschild metric in form but is not exactly
any of the standard geometries typically considered in general
relativity. The fluids here have been assumed to fill all the
spacial dimensions including extra dimensions. We emphasize that the
higher dimensional acoustic black holes discussed above is just a
model, which may help us understand the physics beyond the standard
model and are falsifiable by the future experiments. Although it
might be difficult to detect the Hawking effects of these analogues
in experiments since the Hawking temperature in fact is very low,
they provide us an otherwise way to probe extra
dimensions.
     The scalar emission of Hawking particles in both
FORMULA -dimensional bulk scalar field and 4-dimensional
brane-localized scalar field were studied respectively in a higher
dimensional gravity-wave black hole analogues background. The
amplitude probability in a bulk scalar field was obtained that
allows one to find its dependence on the number of extra dimensions
FORMULA  and the angular momentum number FORMULA . We found that if we fix the
angular momentum number and vary only the number of extra
dimensions, the absorption probability decreases as FORMULA  increases,
and FORMULA  should become more and more
suppressed as FORMULA  increases. The same behavior is observed if we fix
instead FORMULA  and vary FORMULA . The case in which the scalar field is
confined on a 3-brane in a higher dimensional spacetime background
is also discussed. The resulting absorption probability depends only
on the angular momentum number through FORMULA . If
we keep FORMULA  fixed and varying FORMULA , the absorption probability
decreases as FORMULA  increases. But, in both bulk and brane-localized
cases, the energy emission rates are enhanced as FORMULA  increases since
the temperature of the gravity-wave black hole
analogues increases as FORMULA  increases.
Acknowledgments
           S. W. Kim is
supported in part by KRF.
