
Phenomenological constraints on low-scale gravity
Veniamin Berezinsky
INFN, Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso, I-67010
Assergi (AQ), Italy
and Institute for Nuclear Research of the RAS, Moscow, Russia
Mohan Narayan
Mumbai University, Institute of Chemical Technology,
Mumbai 400076, India
and INFN, Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso, I-67010, Asergi (AQ),
Italy
We study the constraints on gravity scale FORMULA  in extra-dimension
gravitational theory, obtained from gravity-induced processes.
The obtained constraints are subdivided into strong (though not robust)
and reliable (though less strong). The strong constraints can be
in principle relaxed due to some broken gauge symmetries, e.g.
family symmetry. The strongest constraint is given by neutrino
oscillations. For different assumptions the lower bound on FORMULA 
is FORMULA  GeV. However, it can be, in principle,
reduced by broken family symmetry. More reliable bounds
are due to flavor-conserved operators or those which change the
flavors within one family. These bounds, obtained using the electron
mass and width of FORMULA  decay, are FORMULA  GeV
and FORMULA  GeV, for these two cases, respectively.

low-scale gravity, hierarchical problem, neutrino masses
and oscillations
11.10.Kk, 14.60.Pq, 13.20.Cz, 23.40.Bw, 95.85.Ry, 97.60.-s
 Introduction
Starting from works {{cite:1e77eaf7-0787-4b79-bc86-2bc2dd3ecdad}},
there has been intense activity in the recent past in constructing
theories, in which the fundamental gravity scale FORMULA 
is much less than the usual Planck scale
FORMULA  GeV.
These theories necessarily involve more than four
space-time dimensions, where the extra dimensions are
compactified. Gravitation propagates in all the dimensions, while the standard
model fields are usually restricted to four dimensions or can
propagate in the extra dimensions in more complicated versions
of this scenario.
One of the main motivations of these models is to provide an
alternative solution to
the hierarchy problem, which is usually taken care of by invoking
supersymmetry.
The fundamental scale of gravity FORMULA  is related to
the Planck scale FORMULA  via the number of extra dimensions
involved and their
radii of compactification.
There is an extensive literature on this subject.
We indicate recent reviews {{cite:3722880a-da87-44fc-a5f9-87247bf9b43a}}, {{cite:9e96a457-9f9f-43a1-b7da-9806c2c2f26a}}, {{cite:5eee62f5-c77f-4bef-8b49-a85f661016aa}}, {{cite:35d89e8e-da8c-485b-a7a4-1b27b1029970}}, in which the reader can
find references to most of the relevant papers in this area.
Many phenomenological restrictions on the fundamental scale FORMULA 
have been studied in the references cited above and it was demonstrated that
low-scale gravity with FORMULA  TeV survives. In this paper we shall
study restrictions imposed by quantum gravity operators, which have
been already discussed in {{cite:c4387e42-1251-4939-ab52-de59c74cf978}}.
The general approach to description of gravity-induced processes consists in
following.
The unknown quantum gravity Lagrangian is assumed to be expanded at
low energies in series of unrenormalizable operators, each being
inversely proportional to the powers of the fundamental scale FORMULA 
{{cite:002c1b17-6b58-4fd9-a146-38182286efc9}}:
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  and FORMULA  are fermion and boson fields, respectively.
The inverse
proportionality to FORMULA  is a natural condition of vanishing of
these operators when FORMULA , i.e. when gravity is
switched off. Assuming the coefficients FORMULA  in expansion
(REF ) we follow argumentation of Hawking {{cite:fa6ebdb5-9b1f-44e8-a8b8-b3c37478ff7b}}.
The Lagrangian FORMULA  and the operators of its expansion (REF )
are expected to break the global symmetries {{cite:fa6ebdb5-9b1f-44e8-a8b8-b3c37478ff7b}}, {{cite:002c1b17-6b58-4fd9-a146-38182286efc9}}, {{cite:cdbe02e6-70ae-4dc4-b85c-a49397d5ef24}}.
It could be understood, for
example, as absorbing a global charge by virtual black hole with its
consequent evaporation. The topological fluctuations (wormhole effects)
break conservation of global charges, too {{cite:d13fac4e-9ec6-4056-bd36-1e3eb84e102d}}.
It could be understood as transition of global charges to baby universes.
On the other hand the discussed
operators should respect the gauge symmetries and gauge discrete
symmetries. In particular, the Lagrangian (REF ) must have
SU(2)FORMULA U(1) symmetry for the Standard Model (SM) fields, before this
symmetry is spontaneously broken.
The exact or spontaneously broken gauge symmetries can in principle suppress
some gravity operators. Berezhiani and Dvali {{cite:c4387e42-1251-4939-ab52-de59c74cf978}} considered the
family symmetry as mechanism of such
suppression. An example can be given by the flavor-changing
neutral currents (FCNC). If flavors are considered as global charges,
FCNC, e.g. FORMULA , appear as gravity induced
operators being suppressed by powers of FORMULA . FCNC effects
should be small, restricted by FORMULA  mixing and FORMULA 
decay. Treating this problem straightforwardly, one obtains the strong
lower bound on FORMULA . As was demonstrated by Berezhiani and
Dvali {{cite:c4387e42-1251-4939-ab52-de59c74cf978}} the broken
family symmetry may suppress additionally FCNC gravity operators. This
interesting possibility reduces, however, the beauty of the original
theory: the gauge family bosons have to propagate in the bulk, what
was prerogative of graviton only. In addition, it also seems somewhat
artificial that the gauge family bosons have this property, while the
other standard model gauge fields do not.
There could be some other broken gauge symmetries which can suppress
additionally the gravity operators. In this paper we shall consider
the broken chiral symmetry as a mechanism of such suppression.
The plan of the paper is as follows.
We begin discussion with the family-flavor violating processes
which in principle can be suppressed by family symmetry. Some of these
processes have been already discussed, nevertheless we discuss them
again, performing more
accurate calculations. Not surprisingly, for this class of processes
we obtain the strongest restrictions. Then we perform the
calculations for processes which cannot be suppressed by family
symmetry. In the section  we discuss how these
operators can be suppressed.

Processes with flavor violation 
Quantum gravity interactions are supposed to violate the global
symmetries, and thus the flavors of particles. However, they must
respect gauge symmetries, and the broken gauge symmetries can suppress
the flavor-changing process. In this section we
shall obtain the bounds to the fundamental gravity scale
FORMULA  from flavor-changing processes neglecting possible symmetry
suppression, and keeping in mind that these bounds are not robust.
Constraint from FORMULA  mixing 
FORMULA  mixing is the consequence of an FORMULA 
interaction, which is very well accounted for within the framework
of the Standard Model. This mixing results in two mass eigenstates
FORMULA  and FORMULA  with masses FORMULA  and FORMULA  .
The mass difference between FORMULA  and FORMULA  is measured very precisely and
is known to be FORMULA  {{cite:3f60c2ba-e82c-4595-b112-02888ec5a70f}}.
It has been realised since a
long time that such a small value of this mass difference will be very sensitive
to any new FORMULA  contributions coming from beyond the standard model
and hence will be able to strongly constrain such new contributions.
If one has an effective FORMULA  four-fermion interaction, then
the usual calculation for this mass difference is done using the "vacuum
dominance approximation" for the hadronic matrix element,
FORMULA ,
(see for example {{cite:3ad3b6ee-3949-4a03-9dff-08f60f5aa48f}}). This gives,
FORMULA ,
where FORMULA  {{cite:3f60c2ba-e82c-4595-b112-02888ec5a70f}} is the constant appearing
in the decay amplitude of FORMULA  and
FORMULA  MeV, is the FORMULA  mass.
FORMULA  parametrizes the strength of the new interaction and the approximation
sign can be interpreted to imply that, there could
be some dimensionless FORMULA  coefficients in front of FORMULA ,
where FORMULA  and FORMULA  are the quark flavors involved in the interaction.
In our case, since low scale gravity is responsible for this contribution, the
interaction is flavor blind and we set FORMULA .
We calculate effect of the hadronization using a scalar current in
exact analogy with FORMULA  decay (see below):
FORMULA 
Hence we obtain
FORMULA 
resulting in
FORMULA 

 FORMULA
The lepton number violating process FORMULA 
gives another bound on the fundamental gravity scale FORMULA .
The decay rate of FORMULA 
in the Standard Model, extended with massive neutrinos
is given by
FORMULA , where formfactor
FORMULA  calculated {{cite:bad1a25c-9caa-4488-8de0-d51cd2097a92}} from the loop diagrams with exchange by
neutrino, is very small
FORMULA 
with FORMULA .
The lowest order quantum gravity operator (REF ) which induces
FORMULA  decay is given by
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the SM scalar field and FORMULA  is e-m tensor
field.
The width of FORMULA  decay calculated using
operator (REF ) after EW symmetry breaking is
FORMULA 
where vacuum expectation value is FORMULA  GeV {{cite:3f60c2ba-e82c-4595-b112-02888ec5a70f}}.
The branching ratio FORMULA  for this decay with respect to the dominant
muon decay FORMULA  ,
FORMULA 
results in FORMULA  GeV, if to use the present upper bound
FORMULA  for FORMULA  decay.

Neutrino oscillations
Here we consider the gravitational interaction among the neutrinos as
responsible for generating an additional term in the neutrino mass matrix,
which is usually taken to be generated by some GUT dynamics.
This additional term is taken as an perturbation to the GUT mass matrix.
We follow the same approach and formalism developed
in the work {{cite:4983cf9c-330c-464f-912c-8c5d0d3fd290}} (where the main aim was to consider
the effect of this perturbation on the neutrino mixing angles).
We refer the reader to it for further details.
Because of this perturbation, the mass
splittings generated by the GUT mass matrix get an additional contribution
due to the gravitational interaction.
From Eq.(11) of {{cite:4983cf9c-330c-464f-912c-8c5d0d3fd290}}, we get an expression for the modified
mass splittings
(FORMULA  are the neutrino masses and
FORMULA  are the mass splittings produced as a result
of some GUT texture which is able to reproduce the observed
masses and mixings).
FORMULA 
where FORMULA , with FORMULA  being the usual neutrino mixing matrix for
three flavors, FORMULA  is a FORMULA  matrix with all elements
equal to 1 and FORMULA .
The KamLAND {{cite:21ccef8e-d357-4adb-b959-68dad101c9bd}} measurement of the lower mass splitting
is a very robust result in neutrino physics confirming the earlier
conclusions drawn from the solar and the atmospheric neutrino data.
In the following analysis, we use this result.
KamLAND gives the central value of FORMULA  as
FORMULA . Let us estimate the correction to
this scale coming from the second term in Eq.(REF ).
Consider the case where the neutrino spectrum
is hierarchial with
FORMULA , where FORMULA  and
FORMULA .
Also, unless the phases in the mixing matrix take very special values,
the term FORMULA  has a value FORMULA .
Therefore the correction term can be written as
FORMULA .
The maximal correction due to the considered term
can be parametrised with help of
FORMULA .
For instance FORMULA 
implies a 100 % correction. This can be translated into
a bound on the scale FORMULA :
FORMULA 
The allowed values of FORMULA  may be obtained from analysis of the
KamLAND data, respecting the general restriction  FORMULA
So the new scale must be even higher than a typical GUT scale.
For a quasi degenerate neutrino spectrum with neutrino
masses at FORMULA  eV, the constraint becomes stronger:
FORMULA 
This result, however, comes with some caveats:
(1) For the degenerate spectrum, for specific
choices of the Majorana phases it is
possible to arrange for
FORMULA 
and hence to relax the constraint on FORMULA .
(2) For very specific choices of the FORMULA  coefficients,
it is possible to use low scale gravity as the only
contribution to the neutrino masses {{cite:6b661a0f-bc72-4776-8cbf-69305dffe19c}}.

Bound from proton decay
Now we discuss the bound on the gravity scale FORMULA  coming from proton decay.
Even restricting our interest to FORMULA 
operators, there are still many possible contributions:
FORMULA 
In the above equation, the 6 operators
of the scalar and of the tensorial type, FORMULA  and FORMULA 
are
FORMULA ,
FORMULA ,
FORMULA ,
FORMULA ,
FORMULA  and
FORMULA .
The 3 operators, FORMULA 
of the vectorial type are
FORMULA ,
FORMULA  and
FORMULA .
These operators were first written down explicitly in {{cite:ca83f846-8dc8-46f8-bddb-83c05327345c}}.
It is simple to see that the weak hypercharge
is conserved in all these. Regarding weak isospin,
the first operator is built
in the FORMULA  channel, the last 3 in FORMULA  and
the remaining ones in FORMULA . Finally the color of the
three quark fields is contracted with FORMULA .
The flavor indices have been suppressed.
If we restrict our attention solely
to proton decay, i.e to FORMULA  process, then the operators
FORMULA  and FORMULA  do not contribute. To
estimate the resulting bound on FORMULA ,
let us consider as an example the channel FORMULA ,
that has a strong bound of FORMULA  years
from the Super-Kamiokande experiment.
The typical hadronic matrix element e.g.,
FORMULA  can be
presented as FORMULA , where FORMULA  is an quark overlap
function with value at origin FORMULA  and
FORMULA  is the spinor describing the proton.
In this way, we obtain the bound:
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is a renormalization factor from FORMULA 
to the scale of proton decay.
This bound is expected to
be correct within a factor of the order of unity, however it is
remarkably insensitive to the details of the
hadronization.

Bound from the Majorana neutrino mass
The quantum gravity dimension 5 operator can be constructed as SU(2)
singlet from lepton and Higgs fields:
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is lepton SU(2) doublet, index FORMULA  denotes the charge
conjugation and FORMULA  the Pauli spin matrices.
This operator generates the Majorana neutrino mass and as it was first
suggested in Ref. {{cite:09d86518-1977-442e-8782-ae08eec7602f}}.
After EW symmetry breaking, Eq.(REF ) gives the following
Majorana neutrino mass term:
FORMULA 
From the cosmological limit on the neutrino masses,
FORMULA  eV {{cite:c3b4abed-7f79-4f2f-8d15-2ce8b491cc1c}}, {{cite:fdbb1435-7b36-4787-980b-4737529bd091}},
valid for any flavor, we obtain using Eq.(REF ):
FORMULA 
Note that though Eqs. (REF ) and (REF ) violate lepton
number, they do not allow transitions between flavors (lepton numbers)
of different families, and therefore the bound (REF )
cannot be suppressed by family symmetry. For further discussion
see section .

Processes without family-flavor violation
In this section we shall study more reliable bounds on the
gravity scale FORMULA . We restrict our consideration by flavor transitions
within one family and by flavor-conserving
operators.
Fermion masses
The Standard Model includes the Yukawa interaction
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is fermion FORMULA  doublet, FORMULA  is the Higgs doublet and
FORMULA  is FORMULA  singlet. The corresponding gravitational operator
can be written, including FORMULA  singlet FORMULA :
FORMULA 
After EW symmetry breaking, the Eq.(REF ) gives the fermion mass term
FORMULA 
Using FORMULA , we obtain the lower bound
FORMULA 
However, the Higgs sector of the Standard Model is most questionable
part of the model. In particular, the differences of fermion masses
in the first and third families requires the physics beyond SM.
The Lagrangian (REF ) may be forbidden
imposing the chiral symmetry, and the lower bound on FORMULA  may
expected to become smaller. We shall demonstrate here that this is not
the case.
Consider the chiral
gauge symmetry within most natural FORMULA 
model {{cite:707ad0ba-91f9-47e6-840b-6e2f49ecaeee}}. In this model for the first family
FORMULA , FORMULA  and FORMULA 
are transforming as FORMULA  and FORMULA ,
FORMULA  and FORMULA 
as FORMULA . For the other families FORMULA  and FORMULA  are defined in the
identical way. The operator (REF ) is not
FORMULA  singlet, and it does not conserve chiral
charges. One
can see it explicitly introducing the gauge interactions in the usual way:
FORMULA 
Now we can write the gravity operator as FORMULA  singlet
which conserves the chiral charges FORMULA 
and FORMULA :
FORMULA 
After spontaneous symmetry breaking we obtain for the fermion mass
FORMULA 
which should be less than FORMULA . The value of FORMULA  is unknown, but it
cannot be less than FORMULA .
Then one obtains
FORMULA 
Thus, submerging SU(2)FORMULA  into SU(2)FORMULA  which respects chiral symmetry, we further increase the
lower bound on FORMULA . Further on we shall use only
limit (REF ) as being more conservative.

Bound from  FORMULA
Let us consider the operator
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  and FORMULA  are FORMULA  doublets and FORMULA  and FORMULA  are
FORMULA  singlets. The operator (REF )
is allowed also by FORMULA  chiral symmetry, if
this symmetry is universal for all right/left fermions.
See section  for further discussion of chiral-symmetry
restrictions.
Therefore, all known symmetries and
conservation laws are satisfied with (REF ),
and we apply it to one family to avoid possible
family-symmetry restrictions.
In terms of the first generation fields it gives
FORMULA 
Performing the Fierz transformation {{cite:3ad3b6ee-3949-4a03-9dff-08f60f5aa48f}} for operator (REF )
we obtain
FORMULA 
This operator results in two observational consequences: (i) it gives
the matrix element for FORMULA -decay unsuppressed by factor
FORMULA , as it occurs in weak interaction, and (ii) it produces
right-handed electrons in beta decays with the opposite helicity in
comparison with weak interaction.
We shall concentrate here on much stronger effect (i).
For practical calculations it is enough to use the operator
FORMULA 
where we omitted the scalar contribution in the FORMULA 
current since it vanishes between hadronic states FORMULA  and FORMULA .
The standard calculations can be performed using the matrix element
for pion decay FORMULA , where FORMULA  is pion momentum and
FORMULA  MeV {{cite:3f60c2ba-e82c-4595-b112-02888ec5a70f}}. Multiplying this equation to FORMULA  and using
the Dirac equations for FORMULA  and FORMULA  quark fields, one obtains
FORMULA 
where the quark masses FORMULA  and FORMULA  are taken to
be 4.5 and 8.5 MeV, respectively {{cite:3f60c2ba-e82c-4595-b112-02888ec5a70f}}.
Using Eq.(REF ), we evaluate
the width of FORMULA  decay, from the contribution coming from weak
interaction and and from Eq.(REF ):
FORMULA 
However, the Standard Model prediction for the decay width FORMULA  agrees
with the experimental width within the error
FORMULA  {{cite:3f60c2ba-e82c-4595-b112-02888ec5a70f}}, and this limits
the new contribution. Thus:
FORMULA 

Summary and discussion
The status of the restrictions obtained for scale FORMULA  varies when different
processes are used.
The constraints from FORMULA  transition and
FORMULA  decay can be straightforwardly suppressed by the
Berezhiani-Dvali mechanism {{cite:c4387e42-1251-4939-ab52-de59c74cf978}}. Gravity-induced neutrino
oscillations in principle is also suppressed by family symmetry,
but this suppression would appear as well in the standard mechanism
for neutrino oscillations, destroying its agreement with observational
data. This problem can be probably solved in a model-dependent way
(see section REF ). In particular, FORMULA  bound decreases when
neutrino masses are produced due to gravitational effects only.
The bound due to Majorana neutrino mass is more robust than one due to
oscillations. It is not suppressed by family symmetry and occurs if
quantum gravity violates lepton numbers.
The case of (almost) Dirac neutrino is given by smallness of this
term, which implies even stronger bound on FORMULA . A possible
relaxation of this bound can be imposed in theory where lepton number
is a gauge charge. Violation of lepton number is provided by breaking
of this symmetry, and then operator (REF ) can include
additional small factor, which reduces the bound (REF ).
Notice, however, that if such mechanism allows transition between
lepton numbers in different families, it affects the standard
oscillation models, like in the case discussed above.
Since the proton decay is not discovered, the existence of some symmetry
protecting the proton and
respected by gravitational interaction cannot be excluded (see
Antoniadis et al. in Ref. {{cite:1e77eaf7-0787-4b79-bc86-2bc2dd3ecdad}}).
Note that the family symmetry {{cite:c4387e42-1251-4939-ab52-de59c74cf978}}
does not work in this case. Moreover, it is always possible to find
some ad hoc mechanism of suppression which makes proton “practically
stable”(e.g. see {{cite:e88c79af-54a3-4cb3-a9bb-3aa0dac5194a}}). Using all these arguments one may probably
exclude bound due to proton decay from the list of robust restrictions.
The bounds from fermion masses and FORMULA  are practically robust.
The former does not include even global symmetry violation and
flavor-changing currents. The operator (REF ) is one-family
operator, it respects chiral symmetry FORMULA , being a
singlet of this group.
If no FORMULA  sector exists, and the symmetry is reduced to
FORMULA  of the SM, the electron mass is given by
operator (REF ).
The operator (REF ) for FORMULA  is one-family operator,
conserving
hypercharge, lepton and baryon numbers. Being FORMULA 
singlet it respects the chiral symmetry. This decay is described by
the flavor-changing current allowed in CC weak interaction,
and it must be allowed in quantum gravity. No global symmetry is violated
by this operator.
Therefore, all theoretically known symmetries allow the operators
(REF ) and (REF ). In principle, these operators can be
suppressed by a new chiral symmetry, given for example by the
following chiral transformations:
FORMULA 
where the rotation angles FORMULA ,  FORMULA , and
FORMULA  are not equal. It results in the different
coupling constants FORMULA ,  FORMULA  and FORMULA  in interaction of
fermions with gauge bosons FORMULA ,  FORMULA ,
and FORMULA .
Operator (REF ) is explicitly forbidden by this “ad hoc chiral
symmetry” (AHCS) , and the modified AHCS-conserving operators are
suppressed when this symmetry is broken. Operator (REF ) can be
suppressed also, but transformation of the Higgs fields must be
specified.
This particular chiral symmetry meets two problems:
the model is not anomaly-free because FORMULA , and for the
simplest Higgs sector the EW symmetry breaking occurs at the AHCS scale.
Indeed, for the massless fields one should introduce two scalars
FORMULA  and FORMULA  to provide masses for FORMULA  and FORMULA 
after spontaneous symmetry breaking. However, vev's
FORMULA  and FORMULA  break also EW symmetry
giving too large masses to W- and Z-bosons.
Finally, AHCS symmetry does not fit the GUT models, while
FORMULA  symmetry is typical for most GUT models, most
notably for SO(10).
Probably one can construct more complicated AHCS model
with the problems indicated above being solved. However, in absence of any
motivation for symmetry (REF ) we qualify this possibility as
exotic.
Obtained bounds are summarised in Table REF .
TABLE 
In conclusion, the supergravity operators (REF ) impose the
lower limits on the fundamental gravity scale FORMULA  TeV. These
limits are valid even if supergravity operators (REF ) break only
fermion flavors, like in case of FORMULA  decay, or conserves
all flavors like in case of a fermion mass. The obtained lower limits
must be considered as a problem for TeV-scale gravity, though we do
not interpret these results as exclusion of TeV-scale gravity. The
simplest possibility is given by some symmetry which forbids or
suppresses the dangerous operators like the AHCS considered
above. However, TeV-scale gravity is only a possibility,
and the lower limits
obtained above, could be an argument in favor of extra-dimension
gravitational theory with the larger scale, like e.g. FORMULA  GeV
in the Horava-Witten scenario {{cite:d2388db9-5439-48c1-b478-2808b9328262}}. These models have the interesting
phenomenological applications, like for example the gravity-induced
neutrino masses ( see section  and {{cite:6b661a0f-bc72-4776-8cbf-69305dffe19c}}).

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Francesco Vissani for the collaboration and
detailed discussions of all items of this paper.
We thank Valery Rubakov, Goran Senjanovic, Alex Vilenkin,
and Valentine Zakharov for valuable discussions. The anonymous
referee is thanked for useful remarks and criticism.
