
PLASTIC RESPONSE OF A 2D AMORPHOUS SOLID TO QUASI-STATIC SHEAR :
II - DYNAMICAL NOISE AND AVALANCHES IN A MEAN FIELD MODEL
Anaël LemaîtreFORMULA 
Christiane CaroliFORMULA 
FORMULA  Institut Navier – LMSGC, CNRS, UMR 113, 2 allée Képler,77420 Champs-sur-Marne, France
FORMULA  INSP, Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6,
CNRS, UMR 7588, 140 rue de Lourmel, 75015 Paris, France
2020/09/07 03:04:25
We build a minimal, mean-field, model of plasticity of amorphous
solids, based upon a phenomenology of dissipative events derived, in
a preceding paper [A. Lemaitre, C. Caroli, arXiv:0705.0823]
from extensive molecular simulations. It reduces to the dynamics of an
ensemble of identical shear transformation zones interacting via the
dynamic noise due to the long ranged elastic fields induced by zone
flips themselves. We find that these ingredients are sufficient to
generate flip avalanches with a power-law scaling with system size,
analogous to that observed in molecular simulations. We further show
that the scaling properties of avalanches sensitively depend on the
detailed shape of the noise spectrum. This points out the importance
of developing a realistic coarse-grained description of elasticity in
these systems.
Introduction
Much effort has recently been devoted to the development of
theoretical descriptions of plasticity of amorphous media. They aim at
proposing macroscopic constitutive laws consistent with the microscopic
information emerging from a wealth of numerical results accumulated
over the past twenty years. In particular, it is now well established
that plastic deformation in these systems proceeds via irreversible
sudden
rearrangements of small clusters of atoms. Even at zero
temperature, these flips occur intermittenly. These empirical facts
are the basis of two recently proposed phenomenologies: the STZ
(shear transformation zone) theory {{cite:dc9979f0-1ca0-4fcb-a456-00dcd9ebc3ae}} and SGR (soft glass rheology) model {{cite:166db89c-02a6-4ab9-bf28-aab57c55135a}}.
Both represent the sheared disordered solid as a set of spatially
random and independent "zones" or "traps" of small size
embedded in a homogeneous background. These structures are metastable,
so that, when loaded elastically by the external driving strain, in
the absence of noise elastic loading would stop at an instability
threshold where they flip into an unstressed state. Moreover, in both
models, structural disorder gives rise to a noise acting in parallel
with advective loading, thus resulting in intermittent flips occurring
before absolute instability is reached. An important point is that
they introduce noise via Arrhenius factors associated with a
constant, strain-rate independent effective temperature.
In an attempt at testing the validity of the assumption concerning
flip independence, Maloney and Lemaître {{cite:5a12e0d0-f2af-4f48-8c37-693923fdd8af}}
later carried out extensive
numerical simulations on 2D glasses of various sizes FORMULA  in the
athermal quasi-static regime (FORMULA ; vanishing strain rate
FORMULA ), hereafter abbreviated as AQS. In this
regime, pure elastic, reversible, loading is interrupted by randomly
spaced discontinuous stress drops associated with the
(quasi-instantaneous) plastic events. They found that these events
can be interpreted as avalanches involving a varying number FORMULA  of
elementary zone flips. In the stationary state, the avalanche size
FORMULA , hence the stress drop amplitude FORMULA  are broadly
distributed, and their averages are system-size dependent. The
average avalanche size scales roughly as FORMULA  {{cite:da673d8d-b81f-423e-b31b-d564286e9fcd}}.
Distributed
avalanches have also been found by Bailey et al in 3D simulations {{cite:4a02890a-18d6-4147-a4c7-b1b4734022d3}},
with an approximate scaling FORMULA .
In the 2D simulations, flips show up clearly as elastic quadrupolar
structures in the energy and the non-affine displacement field,
consistent with their representation as shear transformations of
Eshelby-like inclusions {{cite:d2f6b02a-9050-402c-bd20-46a5206a837a}}. Avalanches are known to result from
long range interactions. In the present case interzone elastic couplings
mediated by the background medium are thus likely to be responsible for
the avalanche behavior.
Motivated by this analysis, we have performed in a previous, companion,
paper {{cite:d571429b-45c5-4a9c-86c5-0addebe43a61}} an extensive numerical study of the
evolution with strain of the non-affine field in a 2D LJ glass. It
substantiates the importance of interzone elastic couplings and leads
to the following picture,
consistent with that proposed already long ago by Argon et al {{cite:de2fb0ef-f5f5-4f43-ad2d-222db20c20ab}}:
via its associated quadrupolar
field, a zone flip induces, at any other zone site in the system, a
shift of the strain level whose amplitude and sign depend on the
relative position of target and source. These shifts may bring some
zones past their instability threshold, hence triggering an
avalanche. For the zones which do not take part in an avalanche, the
flip-induced elastic signals act as an intrinsic dynamical noise
the frequency of which scales as the strain rate FORMULA . The
statistical study of particle motion shows that this noise dominates
largely over fluctuations associated with non affine deformations
during the elastic episodes separating the plastic events.
In this article we propose a minimal model which incorporates as
simply as possible the essential features of this phenomenology in
terms of a set of identical spatially random zones embedded in a 2D
elastic continuum, driven by external loading toward their instability
threshold and coupled via flip-induced quadrupolar elastic fields.
In Section II we define our model in detail. We discuss the various
relevant time scales in steady plastic flow, which allows us to
identify, for finite systems, a size-dependent quasi-static regime
where avalanches can be considered instantaneous. We then study
numerically, in a mean-field approximation for the elastic noise, the
steady state dynamics for different system sizes. We find that
dissipation occurs via broadly distributed flip avalanches, the average size of
which exhibits a power law scaling with system size: FORMULA . However, the exponent, FORMULA , is definitely
smaller than the value, of order 1, measured in reference {{cite:da673d8d-b81f-423e-b31b-d564286e9fcd}}.
So, in Section III we discuss the various simplifications involved in
our modelling of zones and of their elastic field. This leads us to
test a second version of the model in which we assume
empirically a gaussian spectrum for the elastic noise. While
preserving the existence of the avalanche dynamics, this modified
model turns out to predict the correct power law scaling for FORMULA . We
further show that, in this case, an analytical estimate based on a
Fokker-Planck-like approximation yields the same prediction for the scaling
exponent.
Although still preliminary, these results lead us to conclude that
phenomenologies of plasticity of amorphous media should definitely
incorporate into their basic ingredients the
strain-rate dependent elastic noise generated by the zone flips
themselves.

Elastically coupled zones and avalanches:
The model
We consider an ensemble of FORMULA  identical zones of size FORMULA , shear
elastic modulus FORMULA , randomly distributed with a fixed density
FORMULA  in a FORMULA  elastic medium of lateral size FORMULA . The average
distance between nearest zones FORMULA  is fixed and given by :
FORMULA . The elastic state of each zone is
characterized by an internal strain FORMULA , which measures
the departure from its zero stress state. The FORMULA 's lie
below a common instability threshold FORMULA . The athermal system is
driven by external shear at rate FORMULA , which advects all
FORMULA 's. When a zone reaches FORMULA , it disappears
while releasing an amount of internal strain FORMULA . At
the same time another one is created, at an uncorrelated position,
with zero initial stress (hence zero internal strain).
During a zone flip the cluster of atoms forming the zone jump into a
configuration compatible with the externally imposed strain. This
process relaxes the intra-zone stress and, at the same time, deforms the
surrounding elastic medium. Following Picard et al {{cite:fb1f6b9c-c183-464b-a80b-d149bd11d653}}, its field can be
represented as due to two force dipoles (Figure REF ).
We take for this
strain field its expression in an infinite medium. At relative position
FORMULA  from the flipping center:
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is measured from the shearing direction.
FIGURE 
It has quadrupolar symmetry, hence zero average.
FORMULA  and FORMULA  can be related using the
following argument: the amount of stress FORMULA 
released inside the zone by a flip gives rise to a spatially
averaged, macroscopic stress drop FORMULA , where the number
FORMULA  depends on the shape of the system. From
now on, we assume that FORMULA . In stationary state, over a
large strain interval, the average number of zone flips is
FORMULA . The associated macroscopic plastic
stress release FORMULA  must balance the increase of
elastic stress, FORMULA , due to loading. Hence
FORMULA 
The duration FORMULA  of a flip is controlled by the time necessary
to radiate elastic energy out of the zone region, i.e. by radiative
acoustic damping, so FORMULA , with FORMULA  a sound
speed. This acoustic signal, emitted from site FORMULA ,
propagates throughout and modifies the strains of all other zones FORMULA 
which adjust, over a time FORMULA , to this space-dependent
shift FORMULA . Flip signals thus constitute a
noise acting on the FORMULA 's.
In steady state, the average flip rate in the whole system is
FORMULA 
If flips occur independently, i.e. in the absence of avalanches, the
noise correlation time is FORMULA , and the QS regime, where flips
can be assumed instantaneous, corresponds to FORMULA , that is to:
FORMULA 
For a glass-like system, with FORMULA , FORMULA nm,
zone density FORMULA , lateral size FORMULA mm,
this yields the loose criterion FORMULA .
Now, a first elastic noise signal may drive some FORMULA 's
beyond FORMULA , hence trigger secondary flips, thus initiating
an avalanche whose duration FORMULA  is set by sound propagation.
For a very conservative estimate, we take the average distance between
successive flips to be FORMULA . This leads to a duration FORMULA , with FORMULA  the average avalanche size. It must be
compared with the average time interval {{cite:3a4cf917-f3ae-4891-acfe-8b81b4e9dbef}}
between avalanches FORMULA , given by:
FORMULA 
The QS condition then becomes
FORMULA 
Let us emphasize here an important point, usually ignored in related earthquake
models centered on the issue of criticallity:
the quasi-static range is limited by the acoustic delays
controlling avalanche spreading, hence shrinks with system size.
We will assume from now on that the QS condition is fulfilled. We
thus model the noise by instantaneous shifts FORMULA  of
the zone strains. Moreover, we treat our model, now coined
"E model", in the mean-field
approximation, i.e. assume that the FORMULA 's are
independent random variables, which amounts to neglecting space
correlations between flip centers. That is, we take the spectrum
FORMULA  of these noise signals to be that due to a
spatially uniform distributions of sources truncated at the average
distance between nearest zones FORMULA .
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  given by equation (REF ).
FIGURE 
FORMULA , plotted on Figure REF , is
size-dependent, and has variance
FORMULA 
It exhibits a narrowly peaked structure, associated with distant
zones, and vanishes beyond the cut-off FORMULA , so that all its moments are finite.
Yet, it presents broad, power law, tails. For example, its first half
moment
FORMULA 
At this stage, the model can be summarized into the following two-step
algorithm. Since, in the QS regime, the dynamics between instantaneous
avalanches reduces to steady drift of all FORMULA 's at constant
loading rate:
(i) Starting from an initial configuration where all
FORMULA , we first identify FORMULA . We shift all FORMULA  by
FORMULA , and the first
avalanche is triggered. Then:
(ii) Zone FORMULA  flips, i.e. is removed, while a new one is
introduced at zero strain. This first flip emits a noise signal which
randomly shifts all the other zones: FORMULA , where the
FORMULA 's are independent and distributed according to
FORMULA . If all FORMULA , we
are back to step (i). Otherwise, an avalanche starts: we count
the number FORMULA  of zones which flip at this stage and are replaced
by new, unstrained, ones.
(iii) Each zone must now receive FORMULA  signals, which we
treat successively. The first of these yields a new shifted
configuration FORMULA  which produces FORMULA  new flips.
FORMULA  is then updated to FORMULA , etc...The
avalanche stops when FORMULA  vanishes. Its size is FORMULA .

Numerical results
In order to study the statistical properties of our model in steady
state, we eliminate the initial transients (FORMULA ) and perform ergodic averaging over long strain intervals involving
FORMULA  avalanches.
FIGURE 
As shown on Figure REF , their size distribution
FORMULA  depends only weakly on the size FORMULA  for small FORMULA (
FORMULA ). For FORMULA , it presents a quasi-exponential
tail, which broadens noticeably with increasing FORMULA . This size
dependence reflects into the growth with FORMULA 
of the average avalanche size (see Figure REF ) which we
find to fit closely, over the whole FORMULA -range (two decades) a power
law behavior:
FORMULA 
FIGURE 
When plotting FORMULA  versus FORMULA  (see insert of Figure REF ) it turns out, however,
that FORMULA  does not obey a simple scaling. Even though power
law like decay may be identified on a limited, small-FORMULA , range, this
by no means allows us to conclude to self-criticallity – at variance
with a previous claim by Chen et al on a related earthquake model {{cite:f5c7918a-a097-49fe-9427-c1b72743f4e6}}.
We must now confront the above results with those of the molecular
simulations. Clearly, our highly simplified model shows that long range
interzone elastic couplings indeed produce broadly distributed
avalanches with an average size growing as a power law of system size.
However, at this stage, agreement is merely qualitative, since
(i) The scaling exponent FORMULA  differs from the
simulation value FORMULA .
(ii) In the molecular simulations {{cite:5a12e0d0-f2af-4f48-8c37-693923fdd8af}}, rescaling avalanche sizes by
their FORMULA -dependent average results in a rather good collapse of
data, which does not hold in the model.

Discussion
Approximations of the E model
The above comparison leads us to discuss in more detail the
assumptions involved in our minimal model.
First of all, let us consider more closely our representation of
elastic couplings in our finite system. When approximating the static
elastic propagator by its value for an infinite medium, we neglect
the finite global elastic recoil which necessarily accompanies, when
driving at imposed strain, the macroscopic stress release after each
flip. This recoil, of order FORMULA , should be modelled as a common
backward shift, FORMULA  which should be added to the noise
FORMULA . We have rerun the E model for FORMULA  and 2.
We find that a finite recoil leaves the power law scaling of FORMULA  (equation (REF )) unchanged, the intuitively
expected avalanche size reduction showing up only in a slow decrease
with FORMULA  of the prefactor.
Let us now try to list the various simplifications underlying our
representation of the coupled zones. They can be separately into
approximations concerning respectively (a) the zones themselves and
(b) the elasticity of the embedding medium.
(a) Zones:
We have taken them to be identical, i.e. to have the
same threshold strain FORMULA , and the same shear modulus
FORMULA , which we have assumed to be constant up to FORMULA . However, clearly, in atomically disordered systems,
both FORMULA  and FORMULA  depend on details of the internal
structure of the zone and of its immediate vicinity. So, these two
parameters are certainly distributed about characteristic averages.
For example, a signature of the spread of FORMULA  is the observation in
the LJ simulations {{cite:d571429b-45c5-4a9c-86c5-0addebe43a61}} of instances in which a zone "overtakes"
another one during an elastic loading episode. Moreover, we know {{cite:94e37517-699f-4354-9c78-8f4f2fe4c543}}
and
have checked in ref. {{cite:d571429b-45c5-4a9c-86c5-0addebe43a61}} that significant elastic softening occurs near the
threshold, where a metastability barrier vanishes.
On the other hand, it was observed in {{cite:d571429b-45c5-4a9c-86c5-0addebe43a61}}
that, frequently, a first
flip does not result in the disappearance of the zone. Rather, this
persists after a finite strain release, several flips being needed for
it to finally "die out". Describing this behavior would demand a
multistate zone model.
(b) Elastic couplings:
We have represented the embedding elastic medium as a homogeneous
continuum, and have taken for the elastic field (equation
(REF )) its expression for an infinite sytem. We believe that
this last approximation does not affect avalanche size scaling.
Indeed, an elementary dimensional analysis for the stain field
FORMULA  in a finite FORMULA  box shows that all its
moments retain the same FORMULA  dependence as those of the FORMULA 
spectrum (equation (REF )) used in Section II.
Note however that the homogeneous continuum approximation itself is probably
overschematic, in particular at short distances, where numerical
studies of the response to a localized force have shown that it is
dominated by disorder-induced fluctuations {{cite:44dee57c-304e-427e-a41a-687f189e5c0d}}.
This certainly contributes to a decrease of the tail of noise spectrum.
Pending more quantitative information about these finer disorder
effects, we now propose to test the robustness of our minimal model by
investigating the avalanche statistics under the empirical assumption of a
gaussian elastic noise spectrum.

Avalanches in a gaussian noise model
In this "G model", we choose the gaussian noise spectrum
FORMULA  to have the same variance FORMULA  as
that (equation (REF )) for the E model. The algorithm is
then implemented as already described.
FIGURE 
Here again, we find broadly distributed avalanches, whose average size
increases with FORMULA  The data, shown on Figure REF , are
consistent with the asymptotic (see insert) power-law behavior:
FORMULA 
FIGURE 
Moreover, Figure REF  shows that the rescaling of the
size distribution FORMULA  as
FORMULA  leads to good collapse.
So, agreement with the results of the molecular simulations is much
more satisfactory than was the case for the E model.
We now attempt to clarify how the noise spectrum affects so significantly the
avalanche behavior. We plot on Figure REF  the strain (ergodic)
averages of the distributions FORMULA  of zone strains
in steady state for the two models and various system sizes FORMULA  ranging
from 250 to 32000. For each model, FORMULA  converges rapidly almost
everywhere toward a limit curve. This reflects into a very weak size
dependence of the macroscopic stress FORMULA , which varies by less than FORMULA  (G model)
and FORMULA  (E model) when FORMULA  increases from 1000 to 32000.
FIGURE 
While FORMULA  and FORMULA  are similar in most of the FORMULA  range,
they present significant differences in the two regions FORMULA  and FORMULA . The peak in FORMULA  results
from refeeding zones at FORMULA  after flips. The larger an
avalanche is, the more the corresponding peak is broadened by ulterior
flips within the avalanche itself. We therefore attribute the washing
out of the peak for the G model to the fact that it exhibits much
larger avalanches. More significant for our purpose is the detailed
behavior of FORMULA  near threshold, which reflects avalanche statistics.
In particular, FORMULA  is directly related to
FORMULA . Indeed, the average flip and avalanche rates
verify FORMULA . On
the other hand, in steady state, the flux of zones which cross
threhold under the effect of advective elastic loading, i.e. which
initiate avalanches, is FORMULA .
So:
FORMULA 
Since the data indicate that FORMULA  diverges for FORMULA , they also indicate that the absorbing boundary
condition FORMULA  should hold asymptotically here. Relation
(REF ) provides a consistency test of our calculations. We
determine FORMULA  with the help of a second order polynomial
extrapolation near FORMULA , with sampling intervals FORMULA . We find that relation (REF )
holds within FORMULA  for the G model and FORMULA  for the E one.
In order to try and obtain analytical estimates for
avalanche size scalings, we describe the evolution of FORMULA 
by the approximate master equation :
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the single flip transition probability
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  the noise distribution, and FORMULA . The delta
term, proportional to the normalized zone flux FORMULA , accounts for post-flip reinjection and
ensures the conservation of zone number.
In this approximation,
advection operates between all single flips, which amounts to
neglecting intra-avalanche time correlations. This leads to an
average advective FORMULA -shift during an avalanche
FORMULA , to be compared with the average diffusive broadening
FORMULA , with
FORMULA  the noise variance. Hence,
FORMULA , which suggests that our
approximation should improve in the large FORMULA  limit.
Integration of equation (REF ) in steady state yields:
FORMULA 
Since FORMULA  is peaked around zero, in the spirit of the Fokker-Planck
approximation,we expand FORMULA  close to
FORMULA  to first order: FORMULA . Using FORMULA , we obtain for the avalanche average
size:
FORMULA 
where the (semi)-moments
FORMULA 
For both models FORMULA , while
FORMULA  and FORMULA  is given
by equation (REF ).
If FORMULA  converges towards a finite value FORMULA ,
equation (REF ) predicts that, for large systems,
– for the G model:     FORMULA
– for the E model:     FORMULA
While this prediction accounts satisfactorily for the numerical
results for the gaussian model, we have checked (see also Figure
REF ) that the log scaling is ruled our by our data. The
reason for this failure is illustrated by the insert of
Figure REF  (top). For the E model, we find that, for
increasing FORMULA , FORMULA  becomes increasingly steep in the near vicinity
of FORMULA . In the FORMULA -range investigated, we see a marked,
non-saturating, increase of FORMULA  suggesting a possible
divergence, higher derivatives increasing even faster. This highly
singular behavior, reminiscent of that analyzed by Chabanol and Hakim {{cite:782bb7a4-7701-4dae-9635-ba2e4545808a}}
for a related model, clearly invalidates the above Fokker-Planck
expansion for model E. Conversely, for the G model, we find
numerically that FORMULA  does exhibit
convergence, towards FORMULA . This regular behavior suggests
that a Fokker-Planck expansion of the master equation
(REF ) should be valid for model G in the large FORMULA  limit.
We have indeed checked that, for increasing FORMULA , the steady state
distribution FORMULA  converges rapidly towards the solution of this
FP equation.
So, while even a schematic representation of long range elastic
couplings suffices to account for avalanches with power law size
scaling,
this discussion underscores that the detailed shape of the
noise spectrum is of crucial importance. Indeed, not only does it
affect the scaling exponent, but, as well, the scaling properties of
the distribution of avalanche sizes.
We consider that the results presented here, though still preliminary,
clearly show that the
dynamical noise due to long range elastic couplings is a key
ingredient that must be included in phenomenologies of plasticity of
amorphous solids. As FORMULA  increases beyond
the limit of the QS rgime, since avalanches are no longer separable,
the spectrum of the flip-generated dynamical noise will of course
change. The question of its evolution with FORMULA , as well as
that of its interplay with thermal noise at finite temperature remain for
the moment completely open ones.
Besides, the above discussion indicates two main
routes for further investigation.
On the one hand, a more realistic modelization of elastic couplings in
the presence of structural disorder is needed. Indeed, Leonforte et al {{cite:9be0ca22-4533-4901-986a-24606c28e328}}, {{cite:44dee57c-304e-427e-a41a-687f189e5c0d}}
have shown that the elastic response of amorphous solids self-averages
into the continuum elastic response only beyond a length scale FORMULA 
of order FORMULA  atomic diameters FORMULA . For FORMULA , the
elastic response is dominated by non-affine effects. So, for the
existing molecular simulations focussing on avalanche dynamics, where
FORMULA  is limited to FORMULA , noise tails are very likely to
be controlled by elastic non-affinity. This issue, as well as that of
the statistical distribution of zone parameters (such as shear
modulus and threshold strain), will demand the development of a
coarse-grained description of the elasticity of glassy systems.
On the other hand, our mean-field approximation wipes out from the
start the correlation anisotropy arising from the quadrupolar symmetry
of elementary events, responsible for the preferential
avalanche orientations observed in the glass simulations of Maloney et
al {{cite:5a12e0d0-f2af-4f48-8c37-693923fdd8af}} and Tanguy et al {{cite:2896eade-948d-4cf8-bc23-fb80671a5193}}.
In order to evaluate the robustness of the
mean-field scalings and also start addressing the issue of
localization, full simulations of model E in the presence of rigid
boundaries will be necessary.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to V. Hakim and F. Lequeux for useful comments.
