
Entropy exchange, coherent information and concurrence
Yang Xiang
njuxy@sina.com
Shi-Jie Xiong
National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures and
Department of Physics, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China
2020/09/07 17:58:45

For a simple model we derive analytic expressions of entropy
exchange and coherent information, from which relations between them
and the concurrence are drawn. We find that in the quantum evolution
the entropy exchange exhibits behavior opposite to that of
the concurrence, whereas the coherent information shows features
very similar to those of the concurrence. The meaning of this result
for general systems is discussed.
03.67.Mn, 03.65.Ud
Quantum entanglement is not only of interest in the interpretation
of the foundation of quantum mechanics, but also a resource useful
in quantum information processing and quantum computation. A measure
of the entanglement in a state of two qubits is the Wooters
concurrence {{cite:f519da9d-a52b-40cb-be34-6d46dd28c09f}}. For pure bipartite states one also
uses the Von Neumann entropy of the reduced density matrix for
either of the parties {{cite:dabc59a7-fed2-4428-a2fe-3ca5a9f3a8ac}}, {{cite:5147e748-5faa-4612-b793-deecb8ea28ae}} to measure the
entanglement. For a simple example, which has been proposed by
Jordan et al. {{cite:ca02e631-95cc-4478-bf8b-8c4a80f42a92}}, we have shown that in the
quantum evolution a modified entanglement fidelity exhibits the
behavior similar to that of the concurrence {{cite:f21803c7-f604-4a00-8e44-c8a723e17a1f}}. In this
paper we investigate other two quantities, the entropy
exchange and the coherent information
{{cite:0a8a2094-894c-4aab-b16a-d5481b0cf754}}, {{cite:391b320e-0de9-4d2c-bbb3-feeb0d7874c8}}, by deriving analytic expressions for
the system proposed by Jordan et al.. From these we obtain
relations between them and the concurrence in the quantum evolution
and discuss the possibility of using them as measures of the
entanglement.
We begin with a brief discussion of noisy quantum processes and
their mathematical descriptions. FORMULA  and FORMULA  are two quantum systems
and the joint system FORMULA  is initially prepared in a pure entangled
state FORMULA . The system FORMULA  is dynamically isolated and
has a zero internal Hamiltonian, while the system FORMULA  undergoes some
evolution that possibly involves interaction with the environment.
The evolution of FORMULA  might represent a transmission process via some
quantum channel for the quantum information in FORMULA . In general, the
evolution of FORMULA  can be represented by a quantum operator
FORMULA , which gives the mapping from the initial state to
the final state
FORMULA 
Here, FORMULA  which
represents the initial state of system FORMULA , and after the dynamical
process the final state of the system becomes FORMULA . In the
most general case, the map FORMULA  must be trace
preserving and is a linear positive map {{cite:b9266f31-6147-4895-9a99-326ae2888427}}, {{cite:39ce0e34-687c-4a6c-9101-4738bafdabe6}}, so
it can represent all unitary evolutions. The evolution may also
include unitary evolving interactions with an environment FORMULA .
Suppose that the environment is initially in state FORMULA . The
operator can be written as
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the spectral
decomposition of FORMULA  with FORMULA  being a base in
the Hilbert space FORMULA  of the environment FORMULA , and
FORMULA . The final
state of FORMULA  is
FORMULA 
The entropy exchange FORMULA  is defined as
{{cite:0a8a2094-894c-4aab-b16a-d5481b0cf754}}
FORMULA 
It is the von Neumann entropy of the final state of the joint system
FORMULA . Throughout this paper we use FORMULA  to denote FORMULA . The
intrinsic expression of the entropy exchange is given by
FORMULA , FORMULA  is the von Neumann entropy of density
operator FORMULA  and FORMULA  is a density operator with components (in an
orthonormal basis)
FORMULA 
The entropy exchange is an intrinsic property of FORMULA , depending only
on FORMULA  and FORMULA . It is a measure of the
information exchanged between system FORMULA  and the environment during
evolution FORMULA . If there is no interaction between
system FORMULA  and the environment, i.e., FORMULA  is a unitary
operator, then after the dynamical process the final state of the
joint system FORMULA  is still a pure state. This means that in this
case the entropy exchange equals zero. A complete discussion of the
entropy exchange can be seen in Refs.
{{cite:0a8a2094-894c-4aab-b16a-d5481b0cf754}}, {{cite:391b320e-0de9-4d2c-bbb3-feeb0d7874c8}}, {{cite:bfaaf919-4b32-4b2d-b96f-73bdfd1e65d7}}. In Ref. {{cite:f21803c7-f604-4a00-8e44-c8a723e17a1f}} we show
that the modified entanglement fidelity (MEF) admirably reflects the
entanglement preservation. The MEF is defined as
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is a unitary transformation acting on FORMULA . A
connection between the MEF and the entropy exchange is given by the
quantum Fano inequality {{cite:0a8a2094-894c-4aab-b16a-d5481b0cf754}},
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  and FORMULA  is the
number of the complex dimensions of the Hilbert space FORMULA 
describing system FORMULA . We can easily find that when FORMULA , i.e.,
the entanglement is admirably preserved in the evolution process,
FORMULA  equals zero. This implies that there may be some connection
between the entropy exchange and the measures of the entanglement,
e.g., the concurrence.
Another important intrinsic quantity is the coherent
information FORMULA . It is defined as {{cite:391b320e-0de9-4d2c-bbb3-feeb0d7874c8}}
FORMULA 
For classical systems, FORMULA  can never be positive since the
entropy of the joint system FORMULA  can never be less than the entropy
of the subsystem FORMULA . But, for quantum systems, FORMULA  may take
positive value. For example, if FORMULA  is an entangled pure
state, then FORMULA  is a mixed state, implying that
FORMULA  and FORMULA . Thus, FORMULA  can be
regarded as a measure of the “nonclassicity” of the final joint
state FORMULA , or, in other words, the degree of the quantum
entanglement retained by FORMULA  and FORMULA .
Now we discuss a simple example introduced by Jordan et al.
in their work {{cite:ca02e631-95cc-4478-bf8b-8c4a80f42a92}}. For this example we can give analytic
expressions of the entropy exchange and the coherent information
from which the relations between them and the concurrence can be
obtained. We consider two entangled qubits, FORMULA  and FORMULA , and suppose
that qubit FORMULA  interacts with a control qubit FORMULA . Then FORMULA , FORMULA  and
FORMULA  respectively correspond to systems FORMULA , FORMULA  and environment FORMULA 
discussed above. We suppose that the initial states of the three
qubits are
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the initial state of joint system FORMULA  and FORMULA .
According to the Schmidt theorem {{cite:6d1c7d81-8ea2-46f9-b567-665c415aae8a}}, a pure state of two
FORMULA -spins can be decomposed as
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  and FORMULA  are two points on the Poincaré
sphere, and the subscript specifies the related qubit FORMULA  or FORMULA .
The “angle” FORMULA  in Eq. (REF ) determines the degree of
entanglement in the state. The angle satisfies FORMULA ,
FORMULA  and FORMULA  correspond to the product states, and
the maximal entanglement is obtained for FORMULA .
Without losing generality we set the initial state of the joint
system FORMULA  and FORMULA  as
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  represent the eigenstates of FORMULA  with
eigenvalues FORMULA . So the density matrix
FORMULA . For simplicity, we omit the
“azimuthal angle" FORMULA , as factor FORMULA  can be
absorbed in eigenstates FORMULA  and has no effect on the final
results.
We suggest an interaction between qubits FORMULA  and FORMULA  described by
the unitary transformation
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  being the strength of the interaction, and
FORMULA  and FORMULA  are two orthonormal vectors for
system FORMULA . Then the changing density matrix for joint system of FORMULA 
and FORMULA  can be calculated as
FORMULA 
The changing density matrix FORMULA  usually represents a mixed
state. In order to quantify the entanglement we adopt the Wootters
concurrence {{cite:f519da9d-a52b-40cb-be34-6d46dd28c09f}} defined as
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the density matrix representing the investigated
state of the joint system of FORMULA  and FORMULA , FORMULA ,
FORMULA , FORMULA , and FORMULA  are the eigenvalues
of FORMULA  in the decreasing order, and
FORMULA  is the complex conjugation of FORMULA .
FIGURE 
From Eq. (REF ) we can obtain
FORMULA 
It is found that at time FORMULA , the state
FORMULA  is changed from the initial entangled state at FORMULA  to
a separable state, while at time FORMULA  the state
FORMULA  returns to the state with the initial entanglement. We
can also find that if the initial state is a product state, i.e.,
FORMULA  or FORMULA , the concurrence always equals zero.
Using Eqs. (REF ), (REF ), (REF ), and (REF ),
we obtain the quantum operation on qubit FORMULA ,
FORMULA 
So FORMULA  and
FORMULA . Substituting them
into Eq. (REF ) and noting that FORMULA , we can get the density matrix FORMULA  in Eq. (REF ) as
FORMULA 
Thus, we have
FORMULA 

We can also directly calculate FORMULA  by using Eq. (REF ) and
Eq. (REF ). From Eq. (REF ), we find that if the initial
state is a product one, i.e., FORMULA  or FORMULA , the
entropy exchange always equals zero.
The evolutions of the entropy exchange FORMULA  and the concurrence
FORMULA  are depicted in Fig. REF . We can see that the
entropy exchange exhibits the behavior opposite to that of
the concurrence in the quantum evolution. During the evolution
FORMULA , the more information exchanged between FORMULA  and
“environment” FORMULA , the more entanglement between FORMULA  and FORMULA  is
lost.
Now we discuss the coherent information FORMULA . By using Eq.
(REF ) we find that FORMULA , so from Eq. (REF ) we can obtain FORMULA .
The evolutions of the coherent information FORMULA  and the
concurrence FORMULA  are depicted in Fig. REF . It can
be seen that FORMULA  exhibits the behavior very similar to that of
the concurrence in the quantum evolution, although their values are
not exactly consistent with each other at all moments.
FIGURE 
The negative correlation between the entropy exchange and the
concurrence is a striking feature of the quantities. In this example
the range of FORMULA  is in FORMULA , where the left-hand side of the
Fano inequality (REF ) is a monotonic decreasing function of
the MEF FORMULA . This means that for a quantum operation with a
given FORMULA  there should be an upper bound of FORMULA . In Ref.
{{cite:f21803c7-f604-4a00-8e44-c8a723e17a1f}} we have shown that FORMULA  exhibits the behavior
similar to that of the concurrence in the quantum evolution. So for
a quantum operation giving FORMULA  there is also an upper bound of
the concurrence. This only gives a rough correlation between the
concurrence and the entropy exchange. Owing to the simplicity of the
example we are able to obtain the analytical expressions of FORMULA 
and FORMULA  and to illustrate the definite negative correlation
between them. In this sample the effect of the environment is
represented by only a single qubit (FORMULA ). In Eq. (REF ), we
assumed the initial state of qubit FORMULA  is a mixed one. For a more
complicated environment we may introduce an extra system, e.g., a
qubit FORMULA , in addition to qubit FORMULA . If this new qubit purifies the
initial state, then all the results obtained above are retained. In
fact, we can regard the system FORMULA  and the environment FORMULA  as a
new joint system and assume that the initial state of this joint
system is a pure state. After a quantum operation which represents
the interaction between subsystems FORMULA  and FORMULA , the final state of
the joint system must be a pure state too, so the entropy exchange
can also be seen as a measure of the entanglement between FORMULA  and
FORMULA . The information exchange between FORMULA  and FORMULA , which is the
result of the interaction, will cause the entanglement between FORMULA 
and FORMULA , and decrease the entanglement between FORMULA  and FORMULA . This
results in the opposite behavior between the entropy exchange and
the concurrence in the quantum evolution. This also means that the
entanglement between FORMULA  and FORMULA  and the entanglement between FORMULA 
and FORMULA  have negative correlation. Thus, the conclusion about the
negative correlation between the entropy exchange and the
concurrence may be extended to the case of environment having two
qubits but the initial state being purified. In other cases where
the environment includes more qubits but there are no correlations
between them, the effect of every qubit in the environment should be
similar to that of the single qubit investigated in this example.
The coherent information FORMULA  depends only on FORMULA  and
FORMULA  and is used to measure the amount of quantum
information conveyed in the noisy channel. We imagine that the
initial state of system FORMULA  is FORMULA  which arises from the
entanglement between FORMULA  and a reference system FORMULA . Now the goal of
Alice in FORMULA  is to send the initial state FORMULA  to Bob via a
quantum channel (which can be described by FORMULA ) and
establish an entanglement between reference system FORMULA  and Bob's
output system FORMULA . The coherent information FORMULA  can express the
degree of achieving this aim. In above investigation we just model
the time evolution of quantum information transmitted via a noisy
quantum channel described by the interaction with a control qubit.
By comparing the coherent information FORMULA  and the concurrence,
we find that FORMULA  is indeed a good measure for the capacity of a
quantum channel to transmit the entanglement.
In summary, for an example modeling interaction with environment we
derive the analytic expressions of the entropy exchange and the
coherent information. From these we find that both the entropy
exchange and the coherent information have profound correlations
with the measure of the entanglement.
Acknowledgments This work was supported by the State Key
Programs for Basic Research of China (Grants No. 2005CB623605 and
No. 2006CB921803), and by National Foundation of Natural Science in
China Grant No. 10474033 and No. 60676056.
