
[twocolumn,prc,aps,epsfig]revtex
[
Electric Flux Tube in Magnetic Plasma
Jinfeng Liao and Edward Shuryak
Department of Physics and Astronomy, State University of New York,
Stony Brook, NY 11794
2020/09/07 05:36:00

In this paper we study a methodical problem related to the
magnetic scenario recently suggested and initiated by the authors
{{cite:d512a845-51ee-4d07-88d3-2af287c302d9}} to understand the strongly coupled quark-gluon
plasma (sQGP): the electric flux tube in monopole plasma. A
macroscopic approach, interpolating between Bose condensed (dual
superconductor) and classical gas medium is developed first. Then
we work out a microscopic approach based on detailed quantum
mechanical calculation of the monopole scattering on electric flux
tube, evaluating induced currents for all partial waves. As
expected, the flux tube looses its stability when particles can
penetrate it: we make this condition precise by calculating the
critical value for the product of the flux tube size times the
particle momentum, above which the flux tube dissolves. Lattice
static potentials indicate that flux tubes seem to dissolve at
FORMULA . Using our criterion one gets
an estimate of the magnetic density FORMULA  at this temperature.
 ]

Introduction
Electric-magnetic duality and monopoles
Studies of magnetically charged objects resurface in theoretical
literature regularly since Maxwell's time, as soon as some new
developments call for their application in different fields. Three
of these are especially important: (i) the celebrated Dirac
quantization condition
{{cite:02fca44c-82f6-449f-a1e2-b96c28c30ae1}}, (ii) the idea put forward by 't Hooft and Mandelstam
{{cite:5a021bd5-e7b1-4179-bf5a-ffaee797ae12}} to view
the QCD confining vacuum as a “dual
superconductor”, and (iii) Seiberg and Witten {{cite:4bb00fdc-59db-4fed-95dc-924074553af9}}
studies of FORMULA  SUSY gauge theories, identifying
magnetically charged degrees of freedom and the usefulness as well
as necessity of jumping from “electric” to “magnetic” language
whenever appropriate. There are excellent reviews covering
historic development of these ideas, see
{{cite:7c69b88e-3a6a-4b65-8775-5379ff1775b5}}, {{cite:5a0354b9-5225-4200-9f7a-dd0c732b7334}}, {{cite:fcdfc6c5-cffe-43bb-b6ca-0916611943bd}}, and (for more recent
progress) {{cite:bbbdb771-25cb-415e-9181-f2f429fc8bdb}}, {{cite:64c16d8a-23d4-4b15-bf58-b46c20dad5ec}}, and also the
excellent book {{cite:c54758c0-068a-4d4f-a8a2-781bcb8c2d90}} by Shnir.
In the context of QCD phase diagram (finite temperature FORMULA  -
baryonic chemical potential FORMULA ) the issue of electric-magnetic
duality were discussed in our previous paper {{cite:d512a845-51ee-4d07-88d3-2af287c302d9}}
(to be referred below as LS1). Brief summary can be made by noticing
that since electric and magnetic objects generally repel each
other, their simultaneous presence results in dominance of one
over the other. In particular: (i) at high-T the
Quark-Gluon Plasma (QGP) is
dominated by electric objects (gluons
and quarks); (ii) at high-FORMULA  and low FORMULA 
QCD is in a color superconductor phase,
dominated by electrically charged diquarks and confining magnetic
objects; while (iii) the vacuum is presumably
a dual (magnetic) superconductor
confining electric objects.
The most important point made in
LS1 is an
introduction of new “electric-magnetic equilibrium line”,
on which both couplings (electric and magnetic), densities, screening
lengths etc are about equal, and thus the volume is somehow shared
equally.
The Dirac condition then demands that at the equilibrium
line both electric and magnetic “fine structure
constants”Note in this work we change units from LS1
and use couplings normalized as standardly done in gauge theories,
with FORMULA  in the Coulomb law, i.e. Heaviside-Lorentz
units. are
FORMULA 
Furthermore, as pointed out by 't Hooft, in nearly all phenomena
the relevant effective coupling is not FORMULA  themselves
but FORMULA 
or FORMULA , further increasing with
the number of colors FORMULA . Thus one naturally is lead to the
conclusion that the
QCD plasma at e/m equilibrium conditions must be strongly
coupled. In LS1 this was proposed to be a possible explanation of
why experiments at RHIC have indeed found a strongly coupled QGP,
see {{cite:579038ab-aecd-4b4c-bbdc-f3fbae53e11b}}, {{cite:68238d13-b34b-464a-9035-4f1efa67fad3}}, {{cite:ca88597e-f37a-41b9-a172-96d93bce1fb0}}, {{cite:c549d78f-7ddc-4f55-923e-e7dc8bfd6f76}} for
discussion of data and other theoretical ideas.
The QCD vacuum and deconfining transition was attempted to be
described by an ensemble of self-dual dyons in
{{cite:12437622-6994-42e5-a618-0cacc1e74792}}{{cite:7f011437-1601-42e5-aa6a-534f9ee09634}}. The presence of
magnetic monopoles, both below and above the deconfinement phase
transition was studied in vast literature on lattice gauge
theories, see e.g. {{cite:1211002d-00e9-45f9-9cb7-8e1969b01e34}}. Our previous paper LS1 has
also studied interrelation of electric and
magnetic quasiparticles numerically, but using much simpler
classical tool – the Molecular Dynamics (MD). While lattice study
uses Euclidean time formalism and thus is restricted to
thermodynamical observables only: we on the other hand were able
to do real-time simulation and calculate such kinetic properties
as viscosity and diffusion constant, see {{cite:d512a845-51ee-4d07-88d3-2af287c302d9}} for
more details.

Electric Flux Tube Formation in Magnetic Plasma
After this brief introduction, let us turn to the subject of the
present paper, the flux tubes. In the usual electric
superconductor the corresponding solution of Ginzburg-Landau
equations was first found by Abrikosov {{cite:68c1257d-8d39-49ba-9247-2b521669f325}}, which was
later revived in field theory {{cite:113bcf83-6957-46e1-8d79-9f669432d55a}} and became
known as Abrikosov-Nielsen-Olesen (ANO) vertex. In the “dual
superconductor” picture of the QCD vacuum properties of the QCD
confining string and the resulting heavy quark potentials have
been discussed extensively: see e.g. reviews by M. Baker
{{cite:ed3671a0-d1f7-451b-8ec6-8f44dcf0d123}}, and more recetnly by G. Ripka{{cite:06ddcdc4-3e86-4859-b590-57525d47b125}}
(with exhaustive list for further references).
Lattice studies (e.g. {{cite:9732747a-aa1a-4fcc-b889-04f782423787}})
provided substantial support to these works. Flux tube behavior at
finite FORMULA  was also extensively discussed: in particular Polyakov
{{cite:2f4ddbc2-545c-49ea-9a0e-b4903aff63c8}} has shown how exponential growth of flux tube
entropy leads to vanishing of the effective tension in free energy
FORMULA  and Hagedorn-like phase transition.
This scenario would predict gradual deconfinement with the string
tension vanishing at FORMULA : in fact for FORMULA  it jumps to
zero.
Deconfinement
transition for various number of colors FORMULA  was studies in detail:
see e.g. {{cite:2835ad09-4e49-4f6d-904a-d29c0dca4b1d}} where FORMULA  up to 12 was studied.
Working with metastable “overheated” confined phase it
was found that the Hagedorn-like transition (at which the string tension of the free energy
vanishes
FORMULA ) can be approximately
located
at a universal (FORMULA  independent)
FORMULA .
Heating usual superconductors above the critical temperature
destroys not only the condensate but also
Cooper pairs themselves. Although normal (metallic) phase is
a plasma of electric objects (electrons), but their characteristic
momenta FORMULA  are orders of magnitude larger than
momenta of Cooper pairs, thus there is no analog
of Abrikosov vortexes in the normal phase.
This does not happen because presence of
a quantum condensate is that necessary for flux tube's existence:
a counterexample can be provided e.g. by quite spectacular
magnetic flux tubes in solar plasmaThey have very large
fluxes and sizes, and thus a macroscopic theory –
magnetohydrodynamics – can be
used for their description, which
unfortunately it is not applicable in our case, for
microscopically small tubes.. Whether charges are Bose-condensed
or not, their scattering on a
flux tube may provide a pressure which may lead to its
stabilization. It is just a matter of certain quantitative condition
for tube stabilization being met.
The questions to be addressed in this work
is whether QGP is like an electric plasma in a metal, without
magnetic flux tubes, or like other plasmas which have them? What
exactly are the necessary conditions for a flux tube formation?
Below we will ignore electric quasiparticles which would induce
screening/termination of electric flux lines{{cite:d7b86e7a-5be6-4a6d-85d6-be2f2575af5c}}
and consider purely magnetic plasma. We will perform
quantum-mechanical study of monopole scattering on the tube and
examine their back-reaction to the tube field through the
associated magnetic current. This will answer these questions.
But before we do so, let us explain few important issues classically, related to the very essence of the electric-magnetic
competition, i.e. “expulsion” of sub-dominant component into
flux tubes and their stabilization. A full quantum mechanical
calculation will be presented in Sections III-V.
We first start with an electric charge FORMULA  being placed within a
free gas of monopoles with mass FORMULA  and charge FORMULA . The
monopole gas should be neutral, i.e. with equal number of positive
and negative charges. We emphasize in advance that monopoles with
either signs have the same effect: this will be seen in the
appearance of FORMULA  rather than FORMULA  in the final results.
At a distance FORMULA  from the charge (see
Fig.REF  left), the (unmodified) electric field
FORMULA  will stir the magnetic
monopoles into Larmor motion with radius FORMULA . As Poincare has
shown{{cite:7c69b88e-3a6a-4b65-8775-5379ff1775b5}}, {{cite:5a0354b9-5225-4200-9f7a-dd0c732b7334}}, {{cite:c54758c0-068a-4d4f-a8a2-781bcb8c2d90}} a century ago, the radius
shrinks near the charge, restricting the motion to a cone — a
small patch of the whole space solid angle. The cone angle is
determined by (with FORMULA  the monopole velocity transverse to
FORMULA )
FORMULA 
The numerator is precisely the field angular momentum of a
charge-monopole pair FORMULA  as first computed by J.
J. Thompson in 1896{{cite:7c69b88e-3a6a-4b65-8775-5379ff1775b5}}, {{cite:5a0354b9-5225-4200-9f7a-dd0c732b7334}}, {{cite:c54758c0-068a-4d4f-a8a2-781bcb8c2d90}}, while the
denominator is the monopole's kinetic angular momentum FORMULA  with respect to the origin. The above formula, rewritten as
FORMULA , reflects the interplay between angular
momenta of the electromagnetic field and of the particle motion.
Though superficially FORMULA  is defined through FORMULA  and FORMULA , it is
actually a conserved quantity uniquely related to the cone angle
FORMULA , see {{cite:c54758c0-068a-4d4f-a8a2-781bcb8c2d90}} for detailed discussion.
In turn, these monopoles form loops of magnetic current FORMULA  (FORMULA  their density) on the cone. The direction of the
current explains the sign of induced electric dipoleNote
that although monopoles with FORMULA  rotate in opposite
directions, they produce currents of the same sign, so it is not
necessary to distinguish them.. Using dual Maxwell's equation
FORMULA , one
finds that such electric dipole is opposite to induced dipoles in
dielectric, so in this sense it is an anti-screening effect.
The charge repels such a dipole: thus monopole will fly away from
the charge.
To make this statement quantitative, let's calculate the curl of
magnetic current around FORMULA . To do that we need to require
that the Larmor circle to be fairly small, for two important
reasons: (i) if it is not small then one has to take into account
the variation of electric field strength which will warp the
circle; (ii) a small Larmor radius enables one to approximate the
FORMULA  by integrating FORMULA  along
the circumference and dividing it by the area of the circle. Small
Larmor radius FORMULA  means small angle FORMULA , i.e. FORMULA . Density of monopoles FORMULA  with angular momentum FORMULA  at
FORMULA , is related to total monopole density FORMULA  by FORMULA , with
FORMULA  some function of FORMULA  and FORMULA . In such case, the result
comes out as:
FORMULA 
Here FORMULA  is the London
penetration length. Interestingly enough one arrives at the second
London equation with an modification coefficient
FORMULA 
FIGURE 
To end this discussion, we emphasize again its main point: motion
of plasma monopoles can function similarly to condensed monopoles,
under the important condition that the field is strong enough,
which specifically means that monopoles' bombarding angular
momentum FORMULA  is much less than the field angular momentum
FORMULA . The effect discussed here and the well-known Meissner
effect of (dual) superconductor share the same mechanism, namely
magnetic particles are scattered by the Lorentz force, inducing
currents which anti-screen the field. On the other hand, there is
a big difference between the two. Meissner effect is only present
in superconductors, which expel arbitrary weak magnetic field.
Plasmas do not have it, and thus distributed weak fields can be
present in the bulk. However, strong enough fields can be expelled
by the plasma into flux tubes, which are in principle metastable.
Solar plasma (for example) has both weak distributed magnetic
fields as well as magnetic flux tubes (visible in telescopes as
substructure of famous solar “dark spots").
Let us now further simplify the problem, by removing
the electric charges to infinity
and leaving only a flux of electric field,
confined in a flux tube (see Fig.REF  right).
Again, monopoles from outside which move into it are turned away
by Lorentz force and leave. Although their energy remains
unchanged, the momentum is changed, which means that there is a
constant pressure acting from the monopole ensemble on the tube.
In essence, it is just dual to the Meissner effect of electric
superconductor, in which the magnetic field gets pushed away.
The situation however is only simple if the strength of the field
in the tube is such that particles penetrate only small part of
its radius. (One can then further simplify the problem into flat
surface, with effective current floating in wall separating
field-free and field regions, as is the case for magnetic flux
tube in solar plasma.) As seen from the
Fig.REF  above, if particles can penetrate into
the flux tube beyond its center, they start generating a
counter-rotating current which eventually destroys the tubes. To
further shed light on how the microscopic flux tube may or may not
exist, more careful analysis of the induced current during
scattering of these bombarding monopoles will help.
The lower right picture (transverse projection of the upper) shows
a few trajectories (with different ending points FORMULA ) in
the constant field FORMULA  region (within tube radius FORMULA ), starting
from the same initial point FORMULA  (at the bottom) with same velocity
FORMULA  (thus curled with same Larmor radius FORMULA ), yet with
different impact parameter FORMULA  as they are aiming at different
angles. The impact parameter is related to the monopole's incoming
angular momentum by FORMULA  depending on whether the
velocity orients toward left or right at the initial point (noting
the positive FORMULA  is pointing into the page in the figure).
For example, the red curve(FORMULA ) is for FORMULA  and FORMULA , the
blue solid/dashed curves is for certain nonzero FORMULA  and same
FORMULA  yet opposite signs (with FORMULA  positive and FORMULA 
negative), and the green solid/dashed curves for even larger FORMULA 
and FORMULA  (with FORMULA  positive and FORMULA  negative).
We now consider the currents FORMULA  produced by various
trajectories. In particular let's examine how the combined current
FORMULA  of two trajectories with same FORMULA  and FORMULA  changes
with FORMULA . The important observation is the following: trajectories
with small FORMULA  or small  FORMULA, like FORMULA , contribute
counterclockwise currents, while trajectories with large FORMULA  or large  FORMULA, like FORMULA , contribute clockwise currents, and there is a critical FORMULA  or FORMULA 
(which is precisely the solid blue curve FORMULA  going right
through the center of tube) beyond which the current inversion
happens. Some simple algebra leads to the following critical
angular momentum of the current inversion:
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  the electric flux. By interpreting the
right-hand-side as the electric-magnetic field angular momentum in
this cylindrical setting, we simply have critical momentum
FORMULA  which coincides with the analysis in the previous
example. Very importantly, strong electric field means large
FORMULA  and stable flux tube, while weak field (with small
FORMULA ) prefers becoming diffusive in the bulk rather than
expelled into flux tube.
As we will show later in the paper, this current inversion
phenomenon is very important. The counterclockwise currents (from
small FORMULA ) strengthen the original fieldNote again
that in the (dual) superconductor case {{cite:06ddcdc4-3e86-4859-b590-57525d47b125}}, the Abrikosov
vortex is exactly supported by supercurrent of scattered
condensate in lowest possible angular momentum, namely FORMULA 
channel., while the clockwise currents (from large FORMULA ) weaken
them. Thus the current inversion is like a "para/dia-electric"
inversion, in macroscopic language, and it kills the flux tubes.
To summarize the lesson from this classical example, the value of
the angular momentum plays essential role in the monopole
scattering by the flux tube. If particles have typical momentum
FORMULA  and the radius of the tube is FORMULA  the angular momentum
is FORMULA . When FORMULA  is small or equivalently
the electric field is strong, the motion is still basically radial
and the pressure argument works. In the opposite limit of large
FORMULA  or weak field, the induced
currents have both signs and cancel each other, and there is no
reason for flux tube to exist. Thus there must be some FORMULA 
value of FORMULA  above which there is no flux tube solution,
depending on exact magnitude of currents induced in channels with
different angular momentum, to be evaluated quantum mechanically
below.
The rest of the paper is structured as following: by devising and
solving a generalized London's equation, we first show in
Section.II how electric flux tube solution could follow from
"macroscopic" electrodynamics in medium beyond superconductor; in
Section.III we outline our self-consistent treatment of flux tube
starting from "microscopic" level; the quantum mechanic scattering
of single monopole in flux tube field will be exactly solved with
analytic wave functions presented in Section.IV for both
non-relativistic and relativistic cases; we then proceed in
Section.V to impose self-consistent condition and find flux tube
size in a thermal medium; application of our results to sQGP
problem is discussed in Section.VI; and finally Section.VII is for
conclusions.

Electric Flux Tube: Macroscopic approach
Borrowing wisdom from electrodynamics of a superconductor and
being motivated by the “modified London” relation
(REF ) we discussed above, we find in this section
solutions to macroscopic electrodynamics equations of London's
type.
Our generalized (dual) version of the second London equation
reads:
FORMULA 
Any constant coefficient could be absorbed in a re-definition of
FORMULA . When combined with one of the (dual) Maxwell's
equations FORMULA , it yields the equation for the electric field
FORMULA 
Macroscopic parameter FORMULA  characterizes how the electric
field gets modified by the magnetic medium. FORMULA  is the
London limit (appropriate for the medium being a dual
superconductor in extremely type-I regime), while FORMULA 
corresponds to the classical monopole gas (as discussed in
preceding section). Intermediate values of FORMULA  are suggested
as an interpolation between the two limits, say to describe a
medium having both Bose condensed and non-condensed components.
Our setup corresponds to cylindrical flux tube (see
Fig.REF  right), with FORMULA  in
coordinates FORMULA . The total electric flux is FORMULA .
The solution for any FORMULA  is given byFor
FORMULA  the boundary condition couldn't be satisfied.
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  being the Bessel and Euler Gamma
functions. If a function FORMULA  is a solution to London
eq.(REF ) with FORMULA , then the function FORMULA  is a solution to the modified eq.(REF ) with
any FORMULA . The normalization constant follows from the total
flux value.
At large distance, FORMULA , the electric field
FORMULA 
vanishes quicker than exponential, leaving most of the flux within
FORMULA . The smaller is FORMULA , the thinner
is the flux tube.
For this flux tube solutions the "string tension" – the energy
per unit length along FORMULA  is
FORMULA 
FORMULA 
is a rapidly decreasing function of FORMULA , and in particular
FORMULA  which means that
(for fixed FORMULA ) a quantum condensate expels the electric
flux into a flux tube with the tension three times larger than a
classical monopole gas does.
Let's summarize the physical picture as well as limitations of the
established solution. Any magnetic medium generically expels the
electric field, as monopoles are back-scattered off it, so there
is possibility for flux tube formation. But different media do
this job with distinct efficiencies, leading to flux tube (if
there is any) with different tensions. The electric flux tube
solutions are rather simple: they describe the problem in terms of
two macroscopic properties of magnetic medium, namely FORMULA  and
FORMULA . There is however an important limitation. The
macroscopic approach is suitable only if the electric field
strength (or the electric flux here) is large, as the detailed
analysis in the introductory examples has shown: we repeat that
strong field makes small Larmor radius of monopoles, thus the flux
tube is a "macroscopic" object and scattering of monopoles happens
basically on the surface. If it is not so, the validity of
eqn.(REF ,REF ) upon which the solution is
based is no longer justified. The intermediate case between
diffusive weak field and macroscopically strong flux tube requires
a microscopic approach, to be discussed in the following sections.

The Microscopic Approach
Starting here and following in subsequent sections, we will pursue
a fully quantum mechanical microscopic approach. Let us first
describe our strategy and approximations made in this section. The
main one is that mutual interaction among monopoles will be
neglected, as it has been argued that magnetic sector of sQGP at
just above FORMULA  is very weakly coupled, see {{cite:d512a845-51ee-4d07-88d3-2af287c302d9}}
for more details. What's more, if one assumes the monopoles are of
't Hooft-Polyakov type{{cite:8aa855ca-1bc8-43bc-87cb-32fe3f75d0c6}}, the Coulomb
interaction between monopoles may be largely cancelled (and
exactly cancelled in the BPS limit{{cite:c6f70502-b6a0-4785-9e54-30cdf5b1655f}}, {{cite:da15eb4e-b592-49b2-a46e-60ea0a2007a2}} for static
monopoles) by scalar/Higgs exchange. But the Lorentz force from
electric fieldAlthough the monopoles in sQGP are built
out of non-Abelian fields FORMULA , each type of monopoles only
interacts with electric field projected into their corresponding
U(1) (see e.g.{{cite:c54758c0-068a-4d4f-a8a2-781bcb8c2d90}}, {{cite:06ddcdc4-3e86-4859-b590-57525d47b125}}), so the Maxwellian field
description still holds. cannot be cancelled and this is the only
interaction of monopoles relevant to our approach. The single
monopole scattering on a flux tube will be treated quantum
mechanically. Both non-relativistic and relativistic cases will be
analyzed: there are evidences that monopoles in sQGP are
semi-relativistic, e.g. with FORMULA 
{{cite:90f725bf-978e-4d6b-a173-5ad778511ef9}}, {{cite:04332cb5-977b-4c7b-9fd8-6259905b5f49}}.
In the following sections we will go through the three steps
below: i) first assume existing flux tube of certain size FORMULA , ii)
then figure out in great details how individual monopole from
medium will be scattered off it and generate some magnetic
current, and iii) finally use the dual Maxwell's equation relating
the electric field and magnetic current to obtain a
self-consistent equation determining the value of FORMULA  (and thus
string tension FORMULA ) as a function of medium parameters
FORMULA . Below we extend the description of strategy a bit more
step by step.
i) For our purpose the electric flux tube with
flux FORMULA  and size FORMULA  is described in cylindrical coordinate
FORMULA  by the following field:
FORMULA 
The corresponding dual vector potential reads:
FORMULA 
The string tension is given by
FORMULA 
According to Dirac quantization, the flux can be normalized via
FORMULA . While the results obtained
below can be used for general FORMULA , we are particularly interested
in FORMULA  as is true for adjoint monopoles in sQGPThere
are strong evidences from lattice study of high-FORMULA  magnetic QCD
which supports the idea that monopoles in QGP have such charges that FORMULA  and
their total numbers scale as FORMULA , see e.g.{{cite:05263ba7-1549-42ac-8d0b-92d6ece7b11f}}.
ii) A monopole moving in such a field is governed by the following
Hamiltonian:
in the non-relativistic case
FORMULA 
while in relativistic case it is
FORMULA 
The conserved quantities are
1) total energy FORMULA ;
2) longitudinal momentum FORMULA ;
3) hence one can use longitudinal energy FORMULA  and
transverse energy FORMULA  to be conserved
separately;
4) the angular momentum FORMULA .
The conservation of both FORMULA  and FORMULA  implies that the
monopole is rejected back (unless FORMULA ) when it approaches the
center of the tube, due to generic centrifugal barrier FORMULA  which dominates at small FORMULA .
iii) The dual Maxwell equation, FORMULA , in cylindrical setup being
FORMULA 
can be integrated in  FORMULA
FORMULA 
The flux tube may presumably be approximated by a constant FORMULA 
inside certain radius FORMULA  and zero outside FORMULA , with
smooth interpolation in between. As an approximation in step(i) we
have used step-like electric field, neglecting the difference
between FORMULA . The advantage is that monopole motion in such
field can be calculated (step (ii)). This shouldn't be a serious
issue as we expect FORMULA . Thus we take FORMULA  as the
constant field strength FORMULA  within tube and
send FORMULA  to zero, obtaining the equation to be used in later
section:
FORMULA 

Quantum Mechanical Motion of a single Monopole 
Quantum mechanical motion of single monopole is described by wave
function FORMULA  which is a scattering solution to FORMULA  with FORMULA  from eq.(REF ). Making
use of conserved quantities, we may decompose the wave function
into FORMULA , with energyHere
we first deal with non-relativistic case, while in the last
subsection the treatment will be generalized to relativistic case
which turns out to be rather straightforward.
FORMULA 
and angular momentum FORMULA . Let's first introduce several
parameters involved later in the solution, including:
FORMULA 
We repeat that FORMULA  tells how much flux is going through the tube. The
meaning of FORMULA  can be explained as follows: it is quantized
(integer-valued) form of a relation between velocity, canonical
momentum and dual field FORMULA  projected (via
their cross-product to FORMULA ) to angular momenta. Classical
path FORMULA  in Fig.1 which has velocity at large distances
directed to the tube center corresponds to FORMULA . The FORMULA 
channel is the one corresponding to FORMULA  path: it goes through
the center because it experiences no centrifugal barrier FORMULA . As we will see below, this correspondence will explain
the signs of the currents, generated in each partial waves.
The Schrodinger equation can then be reduced to the following
cylindrical radial equation
FORMULA 
The effective potential takes the form:
FORMULA 
FIGURE 
The equation could be exactly solved both inside and outside the
tube, as shown separately below:
i) FORMULA  (inside), the
solution is given by confluent hypergeometric function FORMULA :
FORMULA 
ii) FORMULA  (outside), the solution is expressed by two Hankel
functions FORMULA  with proper phase shift
FORMULA :
FORMULA 
Finally the two functions should be connected smoothly at FORMULA ,
which
determines:
the normalization constants FORMULA  satisfying (with
FORMULA  Bessel functions)
FORMULA 
and the phase shift FORMULA  being
FORMULA 
However exceptions to eq.(REF ,REF )
can occur when it so happens that
FORMULA . In such situation the
alternative equations are the following:
FORMULA 
FORMULA 
The coefficient FORMULA  should be determined by calculating
the current at FORMULA  and matching the physical boundary
current, see more discussions in subsection A. below.
To this point, our problem of finding quantum mechanic solutions
(with arbitrary FORMULA ) for monopole scattering off flux tube
have been all set. With these analytical solutions at hand, a few
discussions are in order below.

Scattering Amplitude
Now we discuss the boundary condition and determine the scattering
amplitude. As a scattering problem, we expect an incident current
described by transverse plane wave, say FORMULA , in the
cylindrical setup. Thus we write down the asymptotic wave function
asHere we temporarily normalize the incoming current as
just FORMULA  while in later section additional factor from
density FORMULA  will be included.
FORMULA 
Expanding FORMULA  also in terms of FORMULA  and comparing the above to the large FORMULA  limit of
FORMULA  from eq.(REF ), we obtain the
normalization constant FORMULA  as
FORMULA 
with the feature FORMULA  independent of FORMULA 
valuesOne should keep open mind in that different
boundary conditions lead to different weights FORMULA  among
partial waves. It is not clear if there could be choices other
than the ones used here which can best describe the thermal
monopole scattering by flux tube field. An extreme example is
superconductor which picks only FORMULA  with all others
vanishing..
The partial-wave scattering amplitude is determined via phase
shift as
FORMULA 
This gives the partial-wave scattering cross section, or more
precisely transverse cross "length", as
FORMULA 
The total cross section is a sum of the above over all FORMULA .
Examples of FORMULA  and FORMULA  as functions of FORMULA 
for several values of FORMULA  are plotted in
Fig.REF .
Before closing this subsection,we'd like to point out that the
phase of coefficient given in (REF ) is related to the
choice of FORMULA  as asymptotic incident state (while its unity
amplitude is general). Physically an incident particle can come in
from any direction besides FORMULA  axis, with equal probability,
so an average over all possible orientation of initial FORMULA  is
called for. This can be achieved by first doing calculation using
(REF ) and averaging over the FORMULA  dependence at the end,
and the effect of this procedure is simply the entire suppression
of interference terms among different partial waves.
FIGURE 

Magnetic Current
The magnetic current generated by single monopole during
scattering process can be calculated by
FORMULA 
The nontrivial part is the FORMULA  component:
FORMULA  component is zero and FORMULA  component is
totally irrelevant and can also be set to zero by replacing
FORMULA  with real FORMULA  functions.
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  the unit step function. We may further combine
FORMULA  terms and rewrite it as
FORMULA 
This expression implies two important points: first, significant
contribution to magnetic current comes from small FORMULA  part as is
evident from FORMULA  dependence, so partial waves with large
amplitude at small FORMULA  (namely small FORMULA  channels) are
important; second, according to FORMULA  at FORMULA ,
partial waves with FORMULA  symmetric to FORMULA , namely a pair of FORMULA  channels, tend to produce opposite currents which
substantially cancel each other. It is worth emphasizing that only
FORMULA  partial wave (the one picked by the whole condensate in
ANO vertex case, see e.g. {{cite:06ddcdc4-3e86-4859-b590-57525d47b125}}) will benefit from the
first point and at the same time NOT suffer from the second point.
Clearly for each given FORMULA  the total current FORMULA  to be
integrated in eq.(REF ) should be built up from
summing currents of all partial waves , namely summing FORMULA  over quantum numbers FORMULA . One is naturally concerned
with the convergence of such infinite summation, which is
basically determined by the large FORMULA  behavior. We can expect
that large FORMULA  partial waves contribute very little to the
total current, which bears two simple physical arguments: from
energy point of view, states with FORMULA  experience centrifugal
potential FORMULA  while the kinetic
energy being FORMULA , so if FORMULA  then FORMULA  which means it is very hard for the particle to "climb"
up the potential barrier all the way into the tube; from the
impact parameter perspective, states with FORMULA  and FORMULA  have
semiclassical impact parameter FORMULA , so if
FORMULA  then FORMULA  which means the incident particle will be
largely missing the central part and thus very little scattered,
leading to negligible induced currents. This conclusion has been
confirmed by extensive numerical calculation and practically for
given FORMULA  all partial waves with FORMULA  are vanishingly
small, as is evident from Fig.REF  to be explained in
next subsection.

The Total Current
Now we perform the radial integration
needed in eq.(REF ):
FORMULA 
In Fig.REF  we plot FORMULA  versus FORMULA  for
various FORMULA . The interesting observation is that the integrated
current is negative for FORMULA , positive for FORMULA , while for
FORMULA  partially positive (at small FORMULA ) and negative (at large
FORMULA ). This result from quantum mechanics perfectly agrees with
our conclusion from classical treatment in the Introduction part,
not only qualitatively but even quantitatively: the critical
angular momentum for current inversion observed here FORMULA  with FORMULA  coincides with that predicted by
eq.(REF ) once our flux FORMULA 
with FORMULA  is plugged in.
FIGURE 
Now we perform the final step: namely summing FORMULA  over
FORMULA  to obtain the integrated total current FORMULA . This is
done numerically, with summation cut FORMULA  applied,
see Fig.REF  for results for various FORMULA . As
can be seen, for the displayed regime FORMULA  the summation is
converged enough as soon as FORMULA , as the curves with
FORMULA  and FORMULA  coincide on top of each other
and are hardly distinguishable. It is this numerically evaluated
function FORMULA (with our highest cut FORMULA ) that
will be used in subsequent sections.
The behavior of this function FORMULA  has rather nontrivial
wiggle structure: the general trend is oscillatory, with a modest
negative part at small FORMULA  (basically from negative
contribution from FORMULA ) followed by a rather high positive
peak (dominantly from FORMULA ) between FORMULA . These
first two structures, first negative then positive, basically
cover the interesting region of FORMULA (see discussion in next
paragraph). Suppose there is a flux tube with certain FORMULA , then at
low temperature the typical FORMULA  is small and FORMULA 
falls within negative region which supports the flux tube, while
at high temperature the larger FORMULA  brings FORMULA  beyond
the negative region into the tremendous positive region which will
kill the flux tube. So there is a transition with the border at
FORMULA : beyond this point higher partial waves with FORMULA  (which is also close to the classical
critical value FORMULA ) will become dominant. By Comparison of
this curve with the red dashed one (only FORMULA ), which
corresponds to what superconductor can do, one understands why a
condensate does much better in confining a flux tube than a normal
thermal ensemble can do. The first negative peak, actually the
best pointOne might argue that there will be an even
larger negative peak at FORMULA , however to reach that
point one requires much larger FORMULA  which usually means
broader distribution over FORMULA  around FORMULA , and that will
easily make the total contribution rather small after cancellation
with the adjacent large positive peak. for flux tube formation,
locates at
FORMULA 
FIGURE 
Finally let's discuss interesting range of FORMULA . Remember
ultimately we'd like to discuss the flux tube inside an ensemble
of monopoles with temperature FORMULA . So first, the tube radius
shouldn't be much larger than FORMULA , otherwise the
tube's transverse vibrational modes (FORMULA ) get too
easily thermally excited, making it unstable. Second, large FORMULA 
should be suppressed by thermal distribution, and typical
FORMULA  should be few times FORMULA . Thus it follows
that typical values of FORMULA  should be of the order unity.
The evaluated FORMULA  up to FORMULA  here should be
sufficient for later application.

Partial Wave with FORMULA  and Possible Resonance
FIGURE 
The effective potential FORMULA  with FORMULA  or equivalently
FORMULA  is special in that it vanishes at the center FORMULA , while
for all other FORMULA  states there will be diverging term
FORMULA . The shape of it (see
Fig.REF ) actually indicates possibility for resonance
to occur. Whether there could be resonance solution or not depends
on the competition of the localization energy and the potential
barrier whose peak value is FORMULA  at FORMULA .
To settle this one can look at the condition for the wave function
(REF ) to be zero right upon FORMULA  (which is very
close to the resonance situation and gives estimate of kinetic
energy). This yields the series of particular values of FORMULA : FORMULA , FORMULA , FORMULA , FORMULA , ... Thus
clearly to have one resonance level, one needs at least
FORMULA  namely FORMULA . Indeed by fine search
for resonance structure in scattering phase shift we identified
one resonance in the case of FORMULA , see Fig.REF ,
with FORMULA  very close to the above FORMULA  and
narrow width FORMULA . Nothing similar was found in
FORMULA . With large enough FORMULA  the occurrence of resonance should be
a general phenomenon and the induced current produced by these
resonance states actually will spoil the original flux tube field
as monopole in such state stays in the center of tube and "pushes"
field outward rather than inward: remember the large positive peak
in FORMULA  (black curve in Fig.REF ) is
precisely due to the contribution from FORMULA  partial waves.

Quantum Mechanical Motion of Single Relativistic
Monopole 
In this subsection we generalize the obtained solutions to
relativistic case. Now one has to solve Klein-Gordon equation
(since monopoles are scalar particles) instead of Schrodinger
equation:
FORMULA 
Fortunately it turns out that by again writing eigenstate of
energy FORMULA  as FORMULA 
one recovers exactly the same radial equation as
eq.(REF ) except for changing
FORMULA  to the following
FORMULA 
So all the exact wave functions obtained in non-relativistic case
are still solutions to the Klein-Gordon equation after the above
replacement of FORMULA  in eq.(REF )(REF ).
This change of FORMULA  should be done for all the relevant formulae
above.
Another important change is for the current equation
(REF ): due to relativistic effect the mass FORMULA 
should be replaced by FORMULA  , namely
FORMULA 
The same replacement should also be applied to integration over
current in eq.(REF ).
All other aspects remain pretty much the same as in
non-relativistic case and we skip further discussion.

Self-Consistent Electric Flux Tube Solution
In this section we will self-consistently determine the size FORMULA 
of the electric flux tube carrying flux FORMULA  in an ensemble of monopoles with temperature FORMULA  and
density FORMULA , by using the  FORMULASince we are not
interested in details of the flux tube shape,
we refrain from doing more complicated local matching of the
current and the FORMULA , as local
form of Maxwell equation demands. magnetic current obtained in
previous section.
At this stage the issue is to average the integrated total current
FORMULA  over proper thermal distribution FORMULA 
(through which the medium property comes into play) satisfying
FORMULA . We have
FORMULA 
Note in relativistic case we have to replace the mass FORMULA  by
FORMULA  and move it inside the integration over k. Below
we deal with non-relativistic gas, relativistic gas, and optimally
correlated ensemble separately.
Non-Relativistic Gas
In non-relativistic(NR) gas with FORMULA  large, the kinetics
are simplified, yet in principle one still needs to take into
account the quantum statistics, namely using the Bose-Einstein(BE)
distributions. Only in the non-degenerate limit (with monopole gas
being not dense) one recovers the Boltzmann limit. So we use the
BE distribution FORMULA  normalized to density
FORMULA  by
FORMULA 
In the above FORMULA  is the degeneracy due to internal degrees of
freedom, fugacity FORMULA  is related to chemical
potential and valued as FORMULA  in NR case, and
FORMULA  is the polylogarithm function. We then have the
FORMULA  given by (after integrating out the FORMULA  momentum)
FORMULA 
with the variable FORMULA .
Now by combining
eq.(REF )(REF )(REF ) we
obtain the self-consistent equation for flux tube size FORMULA :
FORMULA 
with the last term FORMULA  from integration over  FORMULA
FORMULA 
The self-consistent equation can be further rewritten in an
elegant way:
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  and FORMULA . So for given parameters one uniquely determines
the flux tube size FORMULA  from the above equation.
The NR Boltzmann limit, satisfying scale hierarchy FORMULA , can be achieved by simply replace FORMULA  in the integration of FORMULA 
by FORMULA . Mathematically this follows from taking
the FORMULA  limit (with only linear terms left) of both
polylogarithm functions.
The results from solving eq.(REF ) are plotted in
Fig.REF . Numerically we didn't see much difference
between FORMULA (blue curve) and FORMULA (red curve) limits. As
FORMULA , the right end of the
horizontal axis corresponds to high-density/low-temperature regime
while the left end represents low-density/high-temperature
regime.
FIGURE 
The distinguished feature is the existence of critical point for
FORMULA  beyond which there will be no
self-consistent solution: this occurs at roughly the same value
for both displayed curves and we obtain the following condition
for the existence of flux tube
FORMULA 
Physically the above result is very appealing: it demonstrates the
mechanism of how a flux tube which exists in the medium at low FORMULA 
is eventually gone as the medium is heated up; on the other hand,
for a medium with given FORMULA  it sets up a lower bound of monopole
density that is required to support the existence of flux tube.
Another feature is that for each given FORMULA 
smaller than the critical value, there are actually two solutions,
one with small FORMULA  (typically smaller than 1, see
solid curves) and the other with large FORMULA  (typically
greater than 1, see dashed curves). This is understandable
according to the complicated wiggle structure of FORMULA .
The solution with smaller radius is the stable one: it is much
thinner and thus has stronger electric field (FORMULA ), which reflects monopoles more sharply near the boundary.
The other solution with larger FORMULA  is unstable and
should be discarded.

Relativistic Gas
In relativistic gas the important scale is set by temperature, so
let's introduce the following dimensionless variables:
FORMULA 
The fugacity FORMULA , now in range FORMULA , is related to density
by
FORMULA 
with the number FORMULA  the degeneracy due to internal degrees
of freedom. FORMULA  serves as normalization constant to
momentum distribution (after scaling momenta by FORMULA ).
The distribution over FORMULA  is given by
FORMULA 
with FORMULA . Similarly combining the above with
eq.(REF )(REF ) one obtains the
relativistic version of the self-consistent equation
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  given by the following integral
FORMULA 
We can further rewrite the self-consistent equation as
FORMULA 
with the newly introduced relativistic parameters
FORMULA  and
FORMULA .
For given sets of parameters FORMULA  (or equivalently FORMULA ) one
can easily find the flux tube size FORMULA  from the above equations by
direct numerics. The situation is quite similar to the
non-relativistic gas which we skip further discussion.

Optimally Correlated Ensemble
Finally let's discuss ensemble beyond an ideal gas. Clearly with
significant interparticle correlations the ensemble may even not
be easily describable by any distribution, however a typical
momentum FORMULA  can still be invoked. A special situation
which we call optimally correlated ensemble is that monopoles from
such ensemble are largely carrying momenta within very narrow
region around FORMULA . On the contrary if the ensemble
particles' momenta are very diffusive in momentum space, it can
hardly support flux tube.
In the optimally correlated ensemble, we approximate
eq.(REF ) as (assuming NR formulae)
FORMULA 
and the self-consistent equation is then given by
FORMULA 
We limit the value of FORMULA  within FORMULA  beyond which
there won't be flux tube solution, as discussed in Section.IV C.
The above can be re-organized into
FORMULA 
The best situation occurs (roughly) around the negative peak in
FORMULA  given by (REF ). From this we set a bound
similar to eq.(REF )
FORMULA 

Disappearance of Flux Tubes in Quark-Gluon Plasma
Results from previous sections are general in nature and
applicable to a variety of plasma physics problems. The present
section, on the other hand, is dedicated to our main application,
the physics of sQGP. From now on we switch to natural units and
systematically put FORMULA .
The existence of string/flux tubes in the QCD confined phase
FORMULA  is rather thoroughly investigated on lattice, via
measurements of static heavy quark potentials. Static free energy
potentials FORMULA  as a function of FORMULA  are only studied for
FORMULA  but for number of quark flavors FORMULA  as well as
physical QCD, see {{cite:90a22603-9514-49a7-a75f-a15067d464d1}}. Those can be used to
extract the entropy and potential energy separately: the peaks of
these quantities (see e.g. Fig.2 of {{cite:01d74ad6-c1e4-4ff7-83e3-b86eca45c9f9}})
happen to be exactly at FORMULA  and then decrease toward larger
FORMULA . The presence of the quasi-linear part of the energy and
entropy at intermediate FORMULA  leads to a conclusion that flux tubes
still exist at FORMULA . Fig.REF  from
{{cite:01d74ad6-c1e4-4ff7-83e3-b86eca45c9f9}} shows how both the internal energy and
entropy look like at FORMULA . Unlike in the free energy (open
squares in the upper plot, in which cancellation takes place), the
internal energy (closed circles) still show at intermediate
FORMULA  a part linearly dependent on FORMULA , while at
FORMULA  it very quickly disappears.
FIGURE 
Why are flux tubes disappearing at large FORMULA ? It can in principle
be due to two different changes in QGP happening as T grows above
FORMULA , to be called (i) electric screening and (ii) magnetic
penetration. The simplest mechanism (i) is that as FORMULA  grows
beyond FORMULA , the density of electrically charged quasiparticles
– gluons and quarks – is growing and eventually it becomes large
enough to screen heavy quarks. The reason for this density growth
is the decrease in effective masses of electric excitations, which
are lattice observables by themselvesSee a related
discussion of various color-electric objects' effective masses in
{{cite:9b299bb5-2517-40b2-bd8a-4b8d934f5faf}}. There we showed the masses are
still rather large and their densities rather small at 1-1.5FORMULA ,
limiting the screening.. At very large FORMULA , in weak
(electric) coupling domain, the screening of the potential is
expected to be described by the Debye theory. However Debye theory
does not describe entropy and internal energy associated with
static quarks at FORMULA , even at large distances, as can
be seen e.g. from calculations of Antonov et al
{{cite:3ac44462-3629-406b-b3b6-74057da443ee}}.
Another effect (ii), discussed for the first time in this work,
is the penetration of
magnetically charged quasiparticles (MQPs) inside the flux tubes,
which destroys them. Indeed, the key parameter FORMULA 
increases with FORMULA  and reaches the critical value
eq.(REF ) for whether flux tube can exist or
not. This imposes the following condition
FORMULA 
Changing FORMULA  from FORMULA  upward the monopoles gets heavier and
their dimensionless magnetic density FORMULA  keeps decreasing:
eventually this will violate the flux tube condition.
We thus identify the equality in (REF ) with the
temperature FORMULA  at which local dissolution of the
flux tubes takes place.
Furthermore, at FORMULA  we expect FORMULA 
{{cite:d512a845-51ee-4d07-88d3-2af287c302d9}}. An independent consideration fixes conditions
for monopole Bose condensation {{cite:90f725bf-978e-4d6b-a173-5ad778511ef9}} which demands that
around FORMULA  the monopole mass over temperature FORMULA .
Combining these estimates with our critical condition for tube
dissolution we obtain the density of magnetic quasiparticles at
FORMULA  to be
FORMULA 
which is within FORMULA  in absolute units.
Can the density of magnetic objects really be of that magnitude
(which superficially looks rather high)? This estimated density
includes in principle contributions from all types of magnetically
charged objects in sQGP, i.e. not only pure adjoint monopoles but
also self-dual dyons and also dyons containing quarksWe
recall that monopoles have fermionic zero modes and states made of
fermions travelling on top of a monopole have to be included as
well. In supersymmetric theories those form spin-1/2 and even 1
magnetic objects, which are needed by supersymmetry to produced
appropriate supermultiplets including the usual scalar
monopoles..
Let us compare the numbers with whatever is mentioned in
literature. We don't know any studies of fermionic objects
mentioned above.
Ilgenfritz et al {{cite:12437622-6994-42e5-a618-0cacc1e74792}} determined their dyon
estimate by the caloron density, which is reliably calculated from
the topological susceptibility. After multiplying by 3/2 their
result for SU(2) we obtain density of self-dual dyons to be
FORMULA . Chernodub and Zakharov
{{cite:25feb318-3763-49cf-a146-4f4c11687934}} mentioned the monopole density which is
directly estimated from lattice configurations by following
gauge-fixed monopoles along their trajectories. Their estimate is
about FORMULA . The sum of the two is
consistent with the upper end of our estimate of what is needed
for formation/dissolution of the flux tube.
Independent comparison can also be made with the vacuum (FORMULA )
monopole density. Bali {{cite:9732747a-aa1a-4fcc-b889-04f782423787}} has measured London
penetration length by fitting lattice result with Abelian Higgs
model. From that one can infer the monopole density to be as large
as FORMULA . Bornyakov et al {{cite:61d6ad78-3900-49f3-86aa-789364da97b1}} gave the vacuum
monopole density to be about FORMULA . All these results are
well above our estimates for the density at FORMULA 
“dissolution point”.
We believe all these numbers are consistent and suggest a coherent
picture, of very dense monopole condensate in vacuum, tightly
confining electric flux into very narrow tubes. When heated
slightly above FORMULA  the monopole condensate changes into a
non-condensed ensemble of monopoles, which is roughly twice less
dense. Yet it is still capable of supporting flux tubes survived
from vacuum, and only around FORMULA  the density of monopoles
drops so low that there won't be flux tube any more. At higher FORMULA 
the electric sector becomes more and more dominant till eventually
small number of heavy monopoles become embedded in the
perturbative electric plasma.

Summary and outlook
In this paper we have studied stability of the electric flux
tube in a monopole plasma. Quantum scattering of a single monopole on
electric flux tube is analyzed in great details. Already classical
analysis hints on the existence of a critical angular
momentum dividing the scattered magnetic currents which
support/dissolve the flux tube. This finding is quantitatively
confirmed by quantum mechanic calculation, in which we have found
exact scattering solutions to Schrodinger/Klein-Gordon equation in
non-relativisitic/relativistic situations. These solutions allowed us
to calculate the magnetic current produced, which is
then averaged over the monopole ensemble and used in
self-consistent determination of the flux
tube size. The exact critical condition has been established, and
applied to electric flux tube dissolution in sQGP system which
interests us most. This leads to an estimate of total density of
magnetic quasiparticles
FORMULA  at FORMULA , where
lattice potentials indicate flux tube dissolution. These numbers
are consistent with
other studies using alternative ways to estimate magnetic density.
As mentioned in the introduction, this work is partly methodical
in nature, ignoring electric quasiparticles which would lead to
screening and termination of flux tubes. The next step
we plan to do is obviously inclusion of both components
and calculation of the static potentials.
Hopefully, when one would consider an appropriate mixture of electric and magnetic quasiparticles, the
lattice data on static potentials between electric and
magneticThose are given by the expectation value of the
so called 't Hooft loop: we have not discussed them in this work.
charges would be explained.
In principle, one should go beyond that and calculate field
distributions around static charges as well. Lattice studies can
be extended to measure directly electric/magnetic fields at FORMULA : in fact the field profiles have been measured for flux
tubes in vacuum before (see e.g. {{cite:9732747a-aa1a-4fcc-b889-04f782423787}}).
Let us end with the following intriguing question. We focused
above on electric flux in magnetic media, ignoring electric
quasiparticles and possible dual phenomenon –
a magnetic flux tube in an electric plasma. (We only
mentioned their existence at low FORMULA  high density regime, in a
color superconductor.) Now, may somewhere along the
electric-magnetic equilibrium line there be conditions supporting
stable flux tubes of FORMULA  types at the same time? It is known
that confinement of both is impossible, but in a uncondensed
plasma regime it may still be the case. A natural place to look
for a QGP with intertwined electric and magnetic flux tubes is at
FORMULA  less or of the order of FORMULA , close to the place where three
major phases – hadronic, color superconductor and QGP – meet.
Although it is quite challenging task to get into this region
using lattice gauge methods, the task is not hopeless.
Acknowledgments.
This work was supported in parts by the US-DOE grant
DE-FG-88ER40388.
