
LCHO-CI method for the voltage control of exchange interaction
in gated lateral quantum dot networks
Irene Puerto Gimenez
Quantum Theory Group,
Institute for Microstructural Sciences,
National Research Council, Ottawa, Canada K1A 0R6

Department of Fundamental Physics,
University of La Laguna,
Tenerife, Spain
Marek Korkusinski
Quantum Theory Group,
Institute for Microstructural Sciences,
National Research Council, Ottawa, Canada K1A 0R6
Pawel Hawrylak
Quantum Theory Group,
Institute for Microstructural Sciences,
National Research Council, Ottawa, Canada K1A 0R6
We present a computational LCHO-CI approach allowing for the
simulation of exchange interactions in gated lateral quantum
dot networks.
The approach is based on single-particle states calculated using a
linear combination of harmonic orbitals (LCHO) of each of the dots,
and a configuration interaction (CI) approach to the interacting
electron problem.
The LCHO-CI method is applied to a network of three quantum dots with one
electron spin per dot, and a Heisenberg spin Hamiltonian is
derived.
The manipulation of spin states of a three-spin molecule by applying
bias to one of the dots is demonstrated and related to the bias
dependence of effective exchange interaction parameters.
73.21.La,73.23.Hk
Introduction
The electron spin is a quantum two level system, a natural candidate
for a qubit.{{cite:2255d69d-3e13-40f6-84ab-e070d776b938}}, {{cite:a7e9064d-d283-4b50-8d72-a27baaa302d3}}, {{cite:cd46bbc8-21e8-4ab6-b08a-3527200115c9}}
For this reason there is currently significant interest in coupling of
individual electron spins localized at different spatial locations to
realize quantum
gates.{{cite:a7e9064d-d283-4b50-8d72-a27baaa302d3}}, {{cite:cd46bbc8-21e8-4ab6-b08a-3527200115c9}}, {{cite:5141cb87-53df-4514-a93e-7d4b5aa87ea0}}
The coupling of the spins of localized interacting electrons is
investigated using the Heisenberg
Hamiltonian.{{cite:5141cb87-53df-4514-a93e-7d4b5aa87ea0}}
In this approach, the Coulomb interactions between electrons are
reduced to the exchange coupling of their spins.
The exchange interaction is parametrized by the exchange constants FORMULA 
dependent upon the specific implementation of the system.
In lateral gated quantum dot devices the spatial localization of individual
electrons can be achieved by electrostatic coupling to their charge.
To date, controlled confinement of one, two, and three spatially
separated electrons has been demonstrated using the
single,{{cite:42daf54f-6f7b-4715-88a4-64c0c541fc20}}, {{cite:920ebf98-9a9f-41b4-b10f-18578c962d57}}
double,{{cite:1e745504-6319-4aa3-8546-db98d5a12bbe}}, {{cite:8c871d45-b9d6-4663-9dbf-2d775e6c5bee}}, {{cite:1b5238ed-170e-4acc-b968-17479b8701b4}}, {{cite:cb9ed626-ff2f-4c7d-a365-52ce2ff4ab98}}, {{cite:6a03f96f-5bb1-4f74-be1c-b7a629bfc2d1}}
and triple{{cite:caed0fc9-542a-42e7-9893-e3a15fde2ca3}}, {{cite:02352f7e-1f73-4a65-85ac-51223aad0506}}
quantum dots, respectively.
In these devices the electronic orbital degrees of freedom are
manipulated directly by tuning the gate voltages, which, only through
topology and statistics, translates into the control over the total
spin of the
system.
{{cite:11b16fe3-b936-43f2-8680-bd47e89d409d}}, {{cite:377953b5-0c98-4aa4-b8f4-e4fee9633759}}, {{cite:7b3e7869-cdaf-4aef-9f43-127fea0afdd1}}, {{cite:d3f8267d-1c80-46e2-b19f-db3b91eaa276}}, {{cite:b8a0bf21-9eb7-4213-9c2c-8f2ad8b1d26e}}, {{cite:df81537c-c6e8-4ff6-bd64-1c8d11bf2688}}
The voltage control of exchange coupling of two electrons in a single
dot {{cite:b79dd7d7-7898-4402-ae33-186ad9acf576}} and
coherent control of spin states of a two-electron double-dot molecule
{{cite:cb9ed626-ff2f-4c7d-a365-52ce2ff4ab98}} was recently demonstrated.
The Heisenberg Hamiltonian appropriate for this two-spin system
is parametrized by a single exchange constant FORMULA , whose magnitude
defines the energy gap between the spin singlet and triplet eigenstates.
By measuring this gap one can establish the dependence of FORMULA 
on the gate voltages. In a more complex network of FORMULA  quantum dots
with one spin per dot the number of exchange couplings needed is equal
to the number FORMULA  of pairs.
Even the simplest network of quantum dots, a triple quantum dot
with one electron per dot,
is described by a Heisenberg Hamiltonian with three exchange
constants, depending nontrivially on the geometry of the system and
the gate layout.
This dependence was studied, e.g., by Scarola and Das
Sarma,{{cite:17467f7f-2816-45d1-96cb-aa0c4ad740c8}} who used the Hubbard,
variational, and exact diagonalization approaches to demonstrate that
the three-spin model is valid only for a limited range of triple-dot
parameters.
Mizel and
Lidar{{cite:11b16fe3-b936-43f2-8680-bd47e89d409d}}, {{cite:377953b5-0c98-4aa4-b8f4-e4fee9633759}}, {{cite:7b3e7869-cdaf-4aef-9f43-127fea0afdd1}}
arrived at similar conclusions using the Heitler-London and
Hund-Mülliken schemes to calculate the energy levels
of three coupled dots with one electron per dot.
In both cases the many-body effects were responsible for the
appearance of higher-order terms in the effective spin Hamiltonian.
The above studies were performed on triple-dot systems consisting of
three dots on resonance, and did not account for tuning of individual
dots. In Ref. korkusinskigimenezprb2007
we used the Hubbard model, and in
Ref. hawrylakkorkusinskissc2005 - the real-space wave
functions coupled with the configuration-interaction technique (RSP-CI) to
analyze the voltage-tunable three-electron gated lateral triple-dot
device, however without mapping the resulting electronic properties
onto the three-spin model.
The Hubbard model is simple but requires parametrization
of the Hamiltonian and cannot be directly linked to gates and applied
voltages.
The RSP-CI technique is very accurate but is difficult to implement
for the future simulation of the time evolution of the quantum system.
The purpose of this work is to present a different computational
approach, where linear combination of harmonic orbitals (LCHO) of each
of the dots is used to describe tunneling of electrons, and the
configuration interaction (CI) approach is used for the treatment of
exchange and correlation in the interacting electron problem.
The LCHO-CI method can then be directly used for the derivation of the
effective Heisenberg Hamiltonian consistent with gate voltages, and
for the simulation of the quantum operations.
We illustrate our method by analyzing the tunability of the exchange
interaction and manipulation of the three spin system with voltage in
a triangular quantum dot molecule.
The triangular quantum dot molecule, realized recently by Gaudreau et
al., {{cite:caed0fc9-542a-42e7-9893-e3a15fde2ca3}} is needed both for
implementation of the quantum teleportation and creation of
three-particle maximally entangled GHZ state.

LCHO-CI method for the electronic structure of quantum dot
networks
Single electron states in a quantum dot network
We describe here the LCHO method for the calculation of single
electron states in a network of two-dimensional quantum dots.
The method is illustrated on the example of a triple quantum dot.
We consider a triple quantum dot molecule created electrostatically by
lateral gates{{cite:caed0fc9-542a-42e7-9893-e3a15fde2ca3}} and approximate its
lateral confinement potential by a sum of three two-dimensional
Gaussians,
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  and FORMULA  being the coordinates of the center of
FORMULA th Gaussian (FORMULA =1,2,3), FORMULA  being its depth, and FORMULA 
being its characteristic width.
The depth and width of each Gaussian are functions of the gate
voltages.
The centers (FORMULA , FORMULA ) of each dot are arbitrary but in
the rest of the paper they are chosen to lie in the
corners of an equilateral triangle.
In the following we express all distances in effective Bohr radii
FORMULA 
and all energies in units of effective Rydberg
FORMULA ,
where FORMULA  and FORMULA  are the electron charge and effective mass,
respectively, and FORMULA  is the dielectric constant of the material.
GaAs parameters FORMULA  FORMULA  and FORMULA  give
FORMULA  meV and FORMULA  FORMULA .
Figure REF  shows the triple-dot confining potential for
FORMULA  FORMULA  and FORMULA  FORMULA .
The dimensionless Hamiltonian for one electron in the potential
of the triple quantum dot network is written in the following form:
FORMULA 
Since an exact analytical solution of the eigenvalue problem of the
Hamiltonian (REF ) is not known, an approximate method is
needed to calculate the energies and eigenvectors of one electron in
the quantum dot network.
Here we employ a quantum dot analog of the Linear Combination of
Atomic Orbitals (LCAO) method.
Expanding the Gaussian potential of dot FORMULA  to second order in FORMULA ,
FORMULA 
results in the harmonic oscillator (HO) potential
FORMULA , with
FORMULA .
The eigenfunctions of this HO potential,
FORMULA 
are products of the 1D HO eigenfunctions
FORMULA 
where FORMULA .
The first three states have the explicit form
FORMULA 
FORMULA 
 FORMULA
Hence, the molecular eigenfunctions of Eq. (REF ), FORMULA , are written as linear combinations of the HO orbitals (LCHO)
centered on each dot:
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  are the expansion coefficients and FORMULA  is the number of
HO orbitals per dot.
To simplify notation, the three indices FORMULA , FORMULA , and FORMULA  of the
HO eigenfunctions FORMULA  have been replaced by
the composite index FORMULA .
Substituting this expression into the eigenvalue problem of Eq. (REF )
and multiplying on the left by FORMULA  gives
FORMULA 
Defining FORMULA  as the Hamiltonian matrix in LCHO basis with
elements
FORMULA 
and FORMULA  as the overlap matrix with elements
FORMULA 
allows us to write the generalized eigenvalue problem as
FORMULA 
Now, defining a new vector
FORMULA 
and multiplying Eq. (REF ) by FORMULA  on the left
gives the standard eigenvalue problem
FORMULA 
In order to calculate FORMULA  the eigenvalue problem of
the overlap matrix
FORMULA 
is solved.
Here FORMULA  is the matrix with the eigenvectors and FORMULA  is the
diagonal matrix with the eigenvalues.
Once the values of these two matrices are calculated,
FORMULA  is obtained from
FORMULA 
Then the energies FORMULA  (REF ) and eigenvectors
(REF ) of the electron in the quantum dot network can be
calculated using Eqs. (REF ) and (REF ).
The accuracy of the solution depends on the number FORMULA  of HO
orbitals included in the basis.
Increasing the number of basis states increases the accuracy
of results.
We now analyze the matrix elements of the Hamiltonian FORMULA  in the
basis FORMULA 
showing explicitly the various contributions to the diagonal onsite
energies and off-diagonal tunneling matrix elements:
FORMULA 
If we label each of the three dots with indices FORMULA , we can
express the diagonal matrix elements as
FORMULA 
where we denote
FORMULA ,
with FORMULA  being the 2D harmonic oscillator potential associated
with dot FORMULA :
FORMULA .
The first term in (REF ), FORMULA , is the
dominant term.
It is the energy of the ground state of the harmonic oscillator
potential FORMULA .
The second term, FORMULA , gives the correction due to non-harmonicity of the confining
potential.
The third and fourth terms,
FORMULA 
and FORMULA ,
give the correction to the energy level of an isolated quantum dot FORMULA 
due to the presence of the other two quantum dot potentials.
The off-diagonal matrix elements describe electron tunneling from dot
FORMULA  to dot FORMULA .
The tunneling matrix elements are determined by several contributions :
FORMULA 
The first term is directly proportional to the overlap between HO
wave functions centered on different dots,
FORMULA , and is therefore small
for dots which are far apart.
The second term, FORMULA ,
is the correction due to non-harmonicity of the confining potential.
The third term, FORMULA ,
is a “two-centered” integral, as it involves a product of three
functions centered at two different dots.
The fourth term, FORMULA ,
is a “three-centered” integral being thus the smallest term.
This analysis of FORMULA  matrix elements can also be applied to a
larger HO basis including more shells (FORMULA , FORMULA , FORMULA ).

Many-electron states in a quantum dot network
The many-electron Hamiltonian of the quantum dot network written in
second quantization is
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  and FORMULA  are, respectively, the creation and
annihilation operators of a particle on the spin-orbital itinerant
(molecular) state FORMULA ,
FORMULA ,
where FORMULA  is the electronic spinor corresponding to the spin
FORMULA .
Indices FORMULA  and FORMULA  run over spin-orbitals,
FORMULA  is the single-particle energy of an electron in the
molecular state FORMULA 
and FORMULA  is the dimensionless Coulomb potential, FORMULA .
The Coulomb matrix elements (CMEs) in the itinerant basis
are computed as linear combinations of CMEs in the localized HO basis
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA 
Using the identity
FORMULA  we have
FORMULA 
with
FORMULA 
and
FORMULA .
These four integrals were obtained analytically and
the double integral (REF ) over FORMULA  and FORMULA  was
carried out numerically.
In order to obtain the energy levels and coherent eigenfunctions of
FORMULA  electrons in the quantum dot network we combine the LCHO method
with the configuration interaction (CI) approach.
In the CI method we build the FORMULA -electron basis out of all possible
configurations of the FORMULA  electrons on the molecular single-particle
states.
The many-electron eigenvalues and eigenfunctions are obtained by
diagonalizing the Hamiltonian (REF ) in this
FORMULA -electron basis of configurations.
The number of these configurations FORMULA  (and hence the dimension of
FORMULA ) depends on the number of electrons FORMULA  and the number FORMULA  of
molecular spin-orbital states through
FORMULA  .
In the case of as few as FORMULA  electrons, LCHO-CI calculations using
only FORMULA -type HO orbital per dot gives 6 spin-orbitals, leading to
FORMULA .
If for LCHO calculation we also include FORMULA -type HO orbitals, there
are 18 molecular spin-orbitals, giving FORMULA , while
including also FORMULA  HO orbitals gives FORMULA .
The number of configurations in the 3-electron basis increases very
rapidly with increasing number of HO orbitals in the one-electron
calculations thus increasing the computational requirements.
One is primarily interested in quantum networks with one electron (one
spin) per quantum dot.
If one retains only one orbital per dot, the number of spin-orbitals
is FORMULA , and number of possible configurations is reduced to
FORMULA 
For FORMULA  spins we already have 184756 configurations.
Further reduction in the number of configurations is possible.
Since the Hamiltonian (REF ) is rotationally invariant,
the Hamiltonian needs to be diagonalized only in one of the subspaces
of lowest FORMULA .
In what follows we present numerical results for the three-electron
FORMULA  and FORMULA  states obtained with the LCHO-CI method.

Effective Heisenberg model
In order to establish a connection with quantum computation, it is
convenient to approximate the Hamiltonian (REF ) of the
system of singly-occupied dots in a quantum dot network by an
effective Heisenberg spin Hamiltonian.
For three electrons in three quantum dots this Hamiltonian takes the
form
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  are the dimensionless exchange coupling constants,
and FORMULA  are the Pauli matrices.
From this Hamiltonian the quantum gate FORMULA  can be obtained by
turning on one FORMULA  for an appropriate amount of
time.{{cite:cd46bbc8-21e8-4ab6-b08a-3527200115c9}}
Combining this gate with single qubit gates we can obtain the FORMULA 
gate, and FORMULA  together with one-qubit gates form the universal
basis for quantum computing.{{cite:2255d69d-3e13-40f6-84ab-e070d776b938}}
Since FORMULA  commutes with FORMULA , FORMULA  matrix is
block diagonal in the basis of eigenvectors of FORMULA .
Here we will treat the subspace FORMULA .
Taking the basis vectors
FORMULA 
we obtain
FORMULA 
Let us introduce a Jacobi basis of spin states:
FORMULA ,
FORMULA ,
and
FORMULA  .
The Heisenberg Hamiltonian (REF ) in the Jacobi basis
has the following form:
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the average exchange constant.
We see that if all exchange constants are equal the two states
FORMULA  and FORMULA  are degenerate eigenstates
with energy FORMULA  and total spin FORMULA ,
while the state FORMULA , corresponding to total spin
FORMULA , has energy FORMULA .
The Hamiltonian of the two degenerate states FORMULA  and
FORMULA  is analogous to the Hamiltonian of a single spin
in a magnetic field, where the magnetic field in the FORMULA  direction is
proportional to FORMULA  and the magnetic
field in the FORMULA  direction is proportional to FORMULA .
This is why our system of three electrons in three dots can be thought
of as a single coded qubit, whose logical states can be manipulated by
varying the exchange constants.{{cite:d3f8267d-1c80-46e2-b19f-db3b91eaa276}}

Results for a triple quantum dot network
We illustrate our theoretical approach on an example of a triple dot molecule with parameters given in Fig. REF .
In section REF  we present the energies and eigenfunctions of one
electron in the triple dot molecule calculated with LCHO method.
In section REF  the energies of three electrons in the triple dot
molecule obtained with LCHO-CI method are analyzed and compared with
results obtained with Hubbard model.{{cite:02352f7e-1f73-4a65-85ac-51223aad0506}}
In section REF  we analyze the triple dot molecule
with one and three electrons when one of the dots is being biased.
Finally, in section REF  we use the Heisenberg model to study
the effects of biasing of one dot in a triple dot molecule with three
electrons and compare the results with those obtained using LCHO-CI
method.
One electron in a triple quantum dot 
Figure REF  shows the set of one-electron energy
levels in the triple quantum dot potential of Fig. REF 
obtained by solving Eq. (REF ) for different LCHO basis sets:
FORMULA ,
FORMULA ,
FORMULA , and FORMULA .
The number of orbitals per shell in the spectra of a triple quantum
dot is three times the number of orbitals per shell in the spectra of
one quantum dot.
Thus, we have three FORMULA  orbitals, six FORMULA  orbitals,
nine FORMULA  orbitals and so on.
The spectrum of one electron in the HO potential associated with one of
the dots has electronic shells
with level spacing FORMULA  FORMULA .
For the electron in an isolated Gaussian dot and assuming LCHO
basis sets composed of FORMULA , FORMULA  and FORMULA  HO shells one obtains FORMULA -FORMULA 
level spacings of FORMULA , FORMULA  and FORMULA  FORMULA  respectively.
When the electron moves in the potential of the triple dot, the
tunneling hybridizes shells from different dots and leads to molecular
levels.
Comparing the spectra of one electron in the triple-dot molecule for
increasing number of HO shells
in the LCHO basis we find that as the number of shells increases the
low energy molecular levels decrease their energy and converge to a
definite value.
The ground state of one electron in the symmetric triple-dot molecule is
nondegenerate, and the first excited state is doubly degenerate.
Figure REF  shows the eigenfunctions of these three levels
(FORMULA  orbitals FORMULA  and FORMULA )
calculated using HO basis sets with different number of orbitals.
Results obtained from calculations with only FORMULA -type HO orbitals in
the LCHO basis are qualitatively the same as those obtained when more
HO orbitals (FORMULA , FORMULA , FORMULA ) are included.
Based on this conclusion, and anticipating a larger number of
electrons in a quantum dot network, we will build the configurations
for the three electron problem including one-electron energies and
eigenfunctions obtained from calculations with the FORMULA -LCHO basis.
Here we show typical numerical values for this FORMULA -LCHO calculation.
The off-diagonal overlap matrix elements appearing in
Eq. (REF ) are FORMULA .
The diagonal on-site energies defined in Eq. (REF ) are
FORMULA  FORMULA 
and have the contributions (FORMULA ):
FORMULA  FORMULA ,
FORMULA  FORMULA ,
FORMULA  FORMULA , and
FORMULA  FORMULA .
On the other hand, the tunneling matrix elements hybridizing the
atomic orbitals of adjacent dots, defined in Eq. (REF ),
are FORMULA  FORMULA  and are composed of (FORMULA ):
FORMULA  FORMULA ,
FORMULA  FORMULA ,
FORMULA  FORMULA  and
FORMULA  FORMULA .
After solving Eq. (REF ), three energy levels
corresponding to hybridized FORMULA  shell and their eigenfunctions are
obtained.
The FORMULA -shell energy gap obtained between the ground state, FORMULA , and the degenerate excited state,
FORMULA  and FORMULA ,
is FORMULA  FORMULA .
We plot these energies in Fig. REF  (first
spectrum on the left).
The eigenfunctions of these three levels, plotted in the left-hand
part of Fig. REF , are:
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the off-diagonal overlap matrix element.
This number appears because the basis eigenfunctions are not orthogonal.

Three electrons in a triple quantum dot network 
Once the one-electron problem has been solved, we proceed to solve the
three-electron Hamiltonian (REF ) using the configuration
interaction method (CI).
The first step is to build the basis of three-electron configurations
in which FORMULA  is to be diagonalized.
This is done for the subspaces FORMULA  and FORMULA .
There are nine three-electron configurations with FORMULA  obtained
by distributing the three electrons among the six molecular
spin-orbitals FORMULA  (for illustration see Fig. REF  (a)).
These configurations can be grouped into six doubly-occupied
configurations:
FORMULA ,
FORMULA ,
FORMULA ,
FORMULA ,
FORMULA , and
FORMULA ,
and three singly-occupied configurations:
FORMULA ,
FORMULA , and
FORMULA .
For the spin-polarized system with FORMULA  there is only one
possible configuration,
FORMULA .
The construction of the Hamiltonian matrix (REF ) in
these bases of configurations requires the knowledge of Coulomb matrix
elements.
The Coulomb matrix elements in the itinerant basis are computed from
Coulomb matrix elements in the localized basis as defined in
Eq. (REF ), using the coefficients of the one-electron molecular
eigenfunctions written in HO basis.
The localized CMEs, Eq. (REF ), for the triple quantum dot
potential of Fig. REF  consist of the onsite repulsion
FORMULA  FORMULA ,
interdot repulsion FORMULA  FORMULA ,
and a number of small electron-electron scattering terms:
FORMULA  FORMULA ,
FORMULA  FORMULA ,
FORMULA  FORMULA ,
and FORMULA  FORMULA .
Upon rotation into the itinerant basis we find that the largest
Coulomb matrix elements include direct repulsion on the lowest kinetic
energy level
FORMULA  FORMULA 
and on the degenerate excited state FORMULA  FORMULA .
The direct and exchange interaction terms between the ground and
excited states are FORMULA  FORMULA  and
FORMULA  FORMULA , respectively,
while the scattering term
FORMULA  FORMULA .
Similar matrix elements are obtained for
the degenerate shell of excited states:
FORMULA  FORMULA ,
FORMULA  FORMULA , and
FORMULA  FORMULA .
These Coulomb matrix elements are used in the construction of the
three-electron Hamiltonian (REF ).
After diagonalizing this Hamiltonian in the basis
of configurations with FORMULA : FORMULA ,
we obtain a spectrum of nine levels, shown in Fig. REF 
(left).
The nine eigenfunctions FORMULA  are linear combinations of the
basis configurations FORMULA .
In the spectrum we can clearly distinguish two groups of levels
separated by a large gap.
The group in the upper part of the spectrum is composed of six energy
levels and the group with lowest energy has three levels.
We focus on this low-energy group.
It is composed of a doubly degenerate ground state and a
non-degenerate first excited state, as shown in
Fig. REF  (b), separated by the energy gap
FORMULA  FORMULA .
The doubly degenerate ground state has total spin FORMULA  and
its two eigenfunctions FORMULA  and FORMULA  have their
biggest contribution from the three electron configurations FORMULA  and FORMULA , respectively.
However, these states are highly correlated, with large contributions
from other configurations.
The eigenfunction FORMULA , with biggest contribution from the
state FORMULA , has also contributions from
configurations FORMULA ,FORMULA  and FORMULA :
FORMULA ,
while the eigenfunction FORMULA  with biggest contribution from
state FORMULA , has also contributions from states FORMULA , FORMULA  and FORMULA :
FORMULA , as shown in
Fig. REF  (c).
The first excited state of this FORMULA  three-electron spectrum,
state FORMULA , has total FORMULA .
Its eigenfunction FORMULA  has approximately equal
contribution from the three singly occupied molecular configurations:
FORMULA , FORMULA  and FORMULA .
Taking into account all four FORMULA  subspaces, the ground state is four
times degenerate (two levels with FORMULA  and two levels with
FORMULA ) and the first excited state is also four times degenerate
(one level belonging to each FORMULA  subspace).
In order to compare the microscopic model with the Hubbard
model{{cite:02352f7e-1f73-4a65-85ac-51223aad0506}} we propose a modified LCHO-CI
method.
First, we carry out the FORMULA -LCHO one-electron calculations neglecting
the overlap matrix.
The resulting one-electron spectrum also shows a non-degenerate ground
state and a doubly degenerate first excited state but with a bigger
energy gap FORMULA  FORMULA .
Next, we apply the CI method to the FORMULA  subspace of Hamiltonian
(REF ) but neglect all localized CME terms different
than FORMULA  and FORMULA .
As in the itinerant electron basis, the three-electron spectrum
obtained in this calculation shows two groups of levels, shown in the
right-hand part of Fig. REF .
The lower group conserves the structure of levels (a non-degenerate
ground state and doubly-degenerate first excited state),
although the energy gap is bigger FORMULA .
On the other hand the upper group of levels not only shows bigger
energy gaps, but the fifth and sixth excited states, nondegenerate in
the full LCHO-CI calculation, become degenerate.

Triple dot under bias
In this section we study the evolution of the energy spectrum of a
three-electron molecule as a function of FORMULA , i.e., the depth of dot
1.
The applied bias is kept smaller than the FORMULA -FORMULA  energy gap of one
electron in one quantum dot in order to prevent population of the
biased dot with two electrons.
This is done so that we can attempt to map the three electron spectra
onto the three spin spectra obtained in the Heisenberg model.
We carry out our calculations for the case of FORMULA -HO orbitals as LCHO
basis.
Figure REF  (a) shows the resulting one-electron
spectra as a function of bias of dot 1.
The bias is measured in the units of the one-electron energy gap
FORMULA  FORMULA .
When the dot is biased, the degenerate excited levels split due to the
breaking of symmetry.
This energy splitting increases with increasing bias .
It is also observed that all energies decrease, but each of the three
energies at a different rate.
This can be understood by analyzing the evolution of orbitals
associated with these energies.
When the three dots are on resonance, the two excited levels are
degenerate, and any linear combination of the two eigenfunctions
FORMULA  and FORMULA , defined in
Eq. (REF ), is also an eigenfunction of the
system corresponding to the same energy.
This leads to equal probability of finding of the electron in each of
the dots.
However, if one of the dots is different, the excited level splits into
two, and the wave functions FORMULA  and FORMULA 
reflect this symmetry breaking.
The first excited state FORMULA  has a contribution from the
HO orbital corresponding to the first dot that decreases
with increasing bias FORMULA  (at the same time the contribution of this
orbital increases in the ground state).
On the other hand, the second excited state FORMULA  does
not have any contribution from this orbital.
Figure REF (b) shows the spectra of three electrons
with FORMULA  in the triple dot molecule for different values of
FORMULA .
We are interested in the three lowest levels as these are the ones
relevant for quantum information processing and thus the ones that
will be mapped onto Heisenberg spectra.
Figure REF (a) shows the energies of these
levels measured from the ground state energy.
The degenerate ground state splits with bias.
When bias is increased, the energy gap between the ground state and
the first excited state increases, while the energy gap between the
first and second excited states decreases.

Heisenberg model for three electrons
We now attempt to map the three-electron spectrum for the case in
which dot 1 is biased onto the spectrum of the three-spin
Heisenberg Hamiltonian (REF ) in the Jacobi basis.
The mapping relies on the assumption that biasing dot 1 can be
modeled by bias-dependent but equal parameters FORMULA ,
while FORMULA  is different, but it may also be a function of bias.
With FORMULA  equal FORMULA , the two Jacobi states FORMULA 
and FORMULA  are eigenstates, with energies
FORMULA 
and FORMULA ,
respectively, and FORMULA  is an eigenstate with energy FORMULA .
The three eigenstates can be written in a way which emphasizes the
role of the electron in the dot under bias (dot 1):
FORMULA  and
FORMULA .
Here the singlet and triplet states involving the second and third
dot were written as
FORMULA ,
FORMULA  and
FORMULA .
Figure REF (b) shows a plot of the energy
spectrum of the Heisenberg Hamiltonian
as a function of FORMULA  from FORMULA  to FORMULA  with
FORMULA  (antiferromagnetic ground state).
By changing FORMULA  from FORMULA  to FORMULA  we drive the system from three
equal dots to dot 1 totally decoupled.
We compare this spectrum to that obtained in the full electronic
calculation, shown in Fig. REF (a).
As we can see, the two spectra behave in a similar manner as a
function of bias of one of the dots ranging from three
equal dots (zero bias) to a bias of FORMULA  times the one-electron energy
gap.
We can now propose a procedure of finding the parameters FORMULA  by
fitting the energy gaps in the Heisenberg spectrum,
FORMULA  and
FORMULA , to those in the
LCHO-CI calculation.
The value of FORMULA  can be extracted at zero bias from the gap
between the doubly-degenerate ground and the excited states.
Assuming FORMULA  to be independent of the bias of dot 1,
two values of FORMULA  - one from each gap of the spectrum -
can be obtained and averaged for each step of bias.
The numerical results show a decreasing value of the coupling constant
FORMULA  as the bias is being increased.
This is the expected behavior because as we bias dot 1 the exchange
of the electron in dot 1 with electrons in dots 2 and 3 decreases.

Conclusions
We presented a computational LCHO-CI approach allowing for the
simulation of exchange interactions in gated lateral quantum
dot networks.
The method was illustrated by analyzing the electronic properties of a
lateral triple quantum dot network with one electron per dot.
The LCHO-CI calculations show a low-energy spectrum composed of an
antiferromagnetic (FORMULA ) ground state separated by a small gap from
the spin polarized (FORMULA ) excited state, and separated by a large
gap from the remaining excited levels involving double occupancy
of quantum dots.
We have shown that the behavior of these eight low-energy levels with
bias of one quantum dot can be effectively reproduced by a Heisenberg
spin model for a certain range of bias applied to quantum dots.
For each value of bias, exchange coupling constants can be calculated
from energy gaps in LCHO-CI model.
We have thus established a connection between physical ”external”
parameters such as voltages, and exchange interaction among spins in
the Heisenberg model.

Acknowledgment
We wish to thank A. Sachrajda, L. Gaudreau, A. Kam, and S. Studenikin
for helpful discussions.
The authors are grateful to the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research,
and IPG to Spanish Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia grant
No. AP-2004-0143 for financial support.
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
