
Quantum toy model for black-hole back-reaction
Clovis MaiaFORMULA  and Ralf Schützhold FORMULA
FORMULA Institut für Theoretische Physik,
Technische Universität Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany
FORMULA Instituto de Física Teórica,
Universidade Estadual Paulista, 01405-900, São Paulo, SP, Brazil
We propose a simple quantum field theoretical toy model for black hole
evaporation and study the back-reaction of Hawking radiation onto
the classical background.
It turns out that the horizon is also “pushed back” in this situation
(i.e., the interior region shrinks) but this back-reaction is not caused
by energy conservation but by momentum balance.
The effective heat capacity and the induced entropy variation can have
both signs – depending on the parameters of the model.
04.62.+v, 04.70.Dy.
Introduction   Black holes are arguably the most simple and at the same time most
intriguing objects in the universe.
The no-hair theorem states that they can fully be described by a
small set of parameters such as their mass FORMULA  and angular momentum FORMULA .
Yet our standard picture of black holes contains many striking
properties:
Even though black holes should be completely black classically,
they emit Hawking radiation due to quantum effects {{cite:c4dd95fd-de25-4d98-90b8-d60d59d3d913}}.
This evaporation process causes the black hole (horizon) to shrink
(in the absence of infalling matter) due to the back-reaction of
Hawking radiation.
Therefore, black holes possess a negative heat capacity {{cite:c4af1eb0-23c0-4c6c-9890-8872584632e8}},
i.e., the temperature grows with decreasing energy.
Extrapolating this picture till the final stages of the evaporation,
the black hole should end up in an explosion, where its temperature
blows up and thus effects of quantum gravity should become important.
Perhaps most fascinating is the observation that the second law of
thermodynamics apparently {{cite:84780078-fc3a-43e2-9e00-8900548c7f5e}} requires to assign an entropy
FORMULA  to the black hole, which is determined by the horizon surface
area FORMULA  via FORMULA  (in natural units FORMULA ).
Taking the analogy between black holes and thermodynamics seriously
provides a very consistent picture, which has been confirmed by various
gedanken experiments {{cite:84780078-fc3a-43e2-9e00-8900548c7f5e}}, {{cite:3bbc9fcc-d351-4111-a61e-0efa4ff52e90}} considering the construction of
heat engines with black holes etc.
It almost seems as if nature was trying to give us some hints regarding
the underlying structure which unifies quantum theory and gravity –
which we do not fully understand yet.
In order to understand these hints better, it might be useful to ask
the question of whether (and how) the aforementioned properties depend
on the detailed structure of the Einstein equations or whether they are
more universal.
For example, the study of condensed-matter based black hole analogues
{{cite:0e888b1e-6b6a-433c-8660-9346677d8d1a}}, {{cite:d25effde-d9bf-4e32-8e96-a65979e3b7ee}} shows that Hawking radiation is a fairly robust
quantum phenomenom {{cite:fbce44ad-0bbf-4a12-b453-086e69dd0dc5}}, which just requires the
occurrence of an effective horizon and is quite independent of the
Einstein equations.
In contrast, the introduction of a black hole entropy with the desired
properties seems to rely on the Einstein equations.
In the following, we try to further disentangle universal features from
properties which are specific to black holes (e.g., Einstein equations,
rotational symmetry, conserved ADM mass).
To this end, we propose a toy model which captures some of the relevant
features of black holes and allows us to study the back-reaction of the
emitted Hawking radiation onto the classical background solution.
Toy Model   In the toy model we are going to discuss, the gravitational field will
be represented by a real scalar field FORMULA  in 1+1 dimensions with
the Lagrangian (FORMULA )
FORMULA 
With respect to the propagation speed FORMULA  of the FORMULA  field,
this form is Lorentz invariant.
The potential FORMULA  is supposed to be very stiff, i.e., the field
FORMULA  is assumed to be heavy in the sense that it can be well
approximated by a classical field.
For definiteness, we choose the sine-Gordon potential
FORMULA , but other potentials admitting
stable solitonic solutions would also work.
The global ground state FORMULA  then corresponds to a vanishing
gravitational field whereas a kink (topological defect) models a black
(or white) hole horizon
FORMULA 
The position FORMULA  of the kink at rest is arbitrary and its width
FORMULA  is determined by FORMULA  and FORMULA .
In comparison to other models of black holes
(see, e.g., {{cite:37377475-8496-4a02-9c78-ef28b14e5dfc}}, {{cite:439af7b0-a8e1-4482-97ce-43ac62d0c17a}}), the advantage of the above
set-up lies in the topologically protected stability and localization
of the kink, which behaves very similar to a particle
(see also {{cite:f779e703-4fb5-4f51-a92b-e1db78b6d706}}).
In order to study Hawking radiation and its impact on the kink, we
consider a massless quantum field FORMULA  coupled to the heavy field
FORMULA  via the coupling constant  FORMULA
FORMULA 
Note that the velocity FORMULA  of the light (massless) field may
differ from FORMULA .
The propagation of the light field FORMULA  in the approximately
classical background FORMULA  is completely analogous to that in a
gravitational field described by the
Painlevé-Gullstrand-Lemaître metric
(cf. {{cite:0e888b1e-6b6a-433c-8660-9346677d8d1a}}, {{cite:d25effde-d9bf-4e32-8e96-a65979e3b7ee}})
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  denotes the local velocity of freely falling frames.
A horizon occurs if this velocity FORMULA  exceeds the speed of light
FORMULA .
Based on the analogy to gravity, we may also derive the pseudo
energy-momentum tensor of the FORMULA  field with respect to the above
metric  FORMULA
FORMULA 
The associated energy density FORMULA  of the light field
FORMULA 
contains negative parts beyond the horizon FORMULA .
Of course, this is precisely the reason why effects like Hawking
radiation are possible {{cite:da0d8fe0-1a73-4a3a-8945-a47b50ce15dd}}.
However, an energy density which is not bounded from below seems
unphysical and typically indicates instabilities (already on the
classical level).
In order to avoid this problem, we may add an extra term which does
not modify the linearized low-energy behavior of our model
FORMULA 
but generates a positive definite energy density
FORMULA 
In the exterior region FORMULA , the classical ground state is
still given by FORMULA , but beyond the horizon
FORMULA , we have
FORMULA .
Thus, the classical ground state profile would not be differentiable
at the horizon, i.e., the term FORMULA  in the energy
density, for example, would be ill-defined.
This problem can be cured by adding another term (which again does
not modify the low-energy behavior) and we finally arrive at the
total Lagrangian of our toy model
FORMULA 
The last term smoothens the classical ground state profile at the
horizon and induces a super-luminal dispersion relation
FORMULA  at large
wavenumbers.
Back-reaction   The equation of motion of the light field can be derived from the
Lagrangian above
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  denote the higher-order FORMULA  and
FORMULA  terms we added for stability and regularity reasons.
Similarly, the heavy field evolves according to
FORMULA 
From the full set of equations, we see that the kink profile in
Eq. (REF ) together with FORMULA  exactly solves the classical
equations of motion (though it is not the ground state).
However, the impact of quantum fluctuations changes this picture:
For FORMULA , the kink acts as a black hole horizon and
thus emits Hawking radiation.
Of course, the energy/momentum given off must come from somewhere and
hence this quantum effects should have some impact on the classical
kink background.
In order to estimate the quantum back-reaction, we quantize the fields
FORMULA  as well as FORMULA  and employ a mean-field
expansion FORMULA  where
FORMULA  denotes the classical kink profile in Eq. (REF )
and FORMULA  as well as FORMULA  are supposed to be small
(i.e., FORMULA ).
Taking the expectation value of Eq. (REF ) and comparing it
with Eq. (REF ), we find that the lowest-order contributions
of the quantum back-reaction force are just given by the expectation
value of the pseudo energy-momentum tensor {{cite:6e9f0943-5509-4914-96da-766b3d98e9c3}}
FORMULA 
Remembering the covariant energy-momentum balance
FORMULA 
we find that FORMULA  denotes the momentum density
FORMULA , which varies with position in general.
In contrast, the energy flux FORMULA  measured with
respect to the stationary frame is constant
FORMULA 
for a kink at rest.
Fortunately, the expectation value FORMULA  can
be calculated analytically for a scalar field in 1+1 dimensions.
In the Unruh state (which is the appropriate state for describing
black-hole evaporation), one obtains {{cite:98472bc9-8972-4b53-b410-4328fcccc36a}}
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  and the effective surface gravity FORMULA 
determining the Hawking temperature
FORMULA 
Note that FORMULA  calculated in the Unruh state
is regular across black-hole horizon FORMULA , but singular at
the white hole horizon FORMULA .
(The Israel-Hartle-Hawking state would be regular at both
horizons.)
Far away from the kink/horizon FORMULA , we just get the usual thermal
flux FORMULA .
The corrections induced by the quantum back-reaction can be visualized
by incorporating them into an effective potential FORMULA  via
FORMULA 
For the classical potential FORMULA , all minima
FORMULA  occur at the same energy FORMULA .
However, the effective potential FORMULA  is distorted such that
the central minimum is lower than the next one describing the black
hole interior FORMULA .
In this sense, the exterior region is effectively energetically
favorable and thus the horizon starts to move inwards, i.e., the black
hole shrinks.
Alternatively, the same result can be derived directly from
Eq. (REF ) via classical time-dependent perturbation theory
around the kink solution.
The differential operator on the left-hand side of Eq. (REF )
possesses a continuum of gapped propagating (delocalized) modes with
FORMULA  and one localized zero-mode FORMULA 
with FORMULA , which just corresponds to a translation of the kink
position {{cite:7a884e5c-22de-4745-926d-95c92acd8320}}.
After expanding the source term FORMULA  in
Eq. (REF ) into these modes, the perturbations in the continuous
spectrum FORMULA  just propagate away from the kink – whereas the
spatial overlap between FORMULA  and the zero-mode
determines the acceleration FORMULA  of the kink position.
Energy and Momentum   In contrast to the fluid analogues for black holes (with a steady
in- and out-flow of energy and momentum), for example, the
kink considered here represents a well localized object, which allows
us to ask the question of where the force pushing back the horizon
comes from.
In general, the contribution of the FORMULA  field to the total
energy-momentum tensor FORMULA  is different
from the pseudo energy-momentum tensor FORMULA 
defined with respect to the effective metric (REF ), which
complicates the analysis {{cite:38df3ffe-5b43-4a1b-8e5f-fc296c96d3a0}}.
Fortunately, these difficulties are absent in our toy model where the
mixed components of both tensors coincide
FORMULA .
The energy density FORMULA  is given by Eq. (REF ) and the
classical expression for the momentum flux density just reads
FORMULA  due to conformal invariance of the scalar field in 1+1
dimensions.
Note, however, that the quantum expectation values differ due to the
trace anomaly {{cite:98472bc9-8972-4b53-b410-4328fcccc36a}}.
The energy flux density
FORMULA  is given by
FORMULA  and differs from the
momentum density FORMULA  in Eqs. (REF ) and (REF )
for FORMULA .
Far away from the kink, we may estimate the above quantities by
employing the geometric-optics approximation and replacing
FORMULA  and FORMULA .
For solutions of the dispersion relation
FORMULA  corresponding to the outgoing
Hawking radiation and its infalling partner particles, the energy
density per normalized amplitude FORMULA  changes its
sign at the horizon, cf. Eq. (REF ).
The energy flux density FORMULA  is constant and positive
everywhere (which is even true beyond the geometric-optics
approximation).
Note that FORMULA  is conserved as we are considering a
quasi-stationary scenario.
Thus, the total energy budget is balanced since the outgoing Hawking
radiation carries away positive energy, but the infalling partners
have a negative energy.
The momentum density FORMULA , on the other hand,
turns out to be negative everywhere – or more precisely, far away
from the kink, cf. the exact expression (REF ) with
FORMULA .
Thus the momentum flux density FORMULA , i.e., the
pressure, also changes sign at the horizon.
(The trace anomaly vanishes in the asymptotic region FORMULA  far
away from the kink where the geometric-optics approximation applies
FORMULA .)
Consequently, while the Hawking particles carry away positive momentum
and push back the kink, their infalling partner particles act in the
opposite way and pull on the kink.
In summary, the momentum is not balanced and thus the kink starts to
move, i.e., the black-hole interior region shrinks.
Thermodynamics   The application of thermodynamic concepts to our toy model (in analogy
to real black holes) presents some difficulties and ambiguities:
Considering the heat capacity FORMULA , for example, we would
associate FORMULA  with the Hawking temperature (REF ).
The variation of the internal energy FORMULA , however, could be identified
with the heat given off by the Hawking radiation
FORMULA  or with the change of the kinetic
energy of the kink FORMULA 
(for FORMULA ).
Since the kink does not possess a conserved ADM mass, these quantities
will be different in general.
Either way, the heat capacity FORMULA  could be positive as well as
negative since the Hawking temperature can be increased FORMULA  or
decreased FORMULA  by the quantum back-reaction of the evaporation
process.
There are several different effects:
Due to the distortion of the effective potential FORMULA , the
shape of the kink deviates from the classical profile (REF ).
This deviation is governed by the aforementioned continuum modes
FORMULA .
Furthermore, the kink starts to move – which is described by the
zero-mode.
The motion of the kink, in turn, implies a Doppler shift of the
Hawking radiation.
Finally, even in the rest frame of the kink, the position of the
horizon FORMULA  changes since the kink velocity FORMULA  effectively
reduces the local frame-dragging speed FORMULA  and therefore the surface
gravity FORMULA  may change.
As a result of all these effects, the heat capacity depends on many
parameters (FORMULA , FORMULA , and FORMULA  etc.) and may assume
negative as well as positive values.
In order to demonstrate this sign ambiguity, let us consider the case
FORMULA  for simplicity.
In this limit, the continuum modes FORMULA  are very fast and
hence the change of the shape of the kink can be neglected, i.e.,
the quantum back-reaction induces a rigid motion of the kink only.
As another simplification, the transformation of the FORMULA -field into
the rest frame of the kink is just a Galilei transformation due to
FORMULA .
The new horizon position is then simply determined by
FORMULA .
Linearizing this equality together with FORMULA ,
we find that the variation FORMULA  of the surface gravity
induced by the acceleration of the kink FORMULA  is determined
by FORMULA .
Since FORMULA  can be positive or negative (depending on the
relation between FORMULA  and FORMULA ), the temperature measured in
the rest frame of the kink could change in both directions.
The temperature in the laboratory frame acquires an additional Doppler
shift, which is given by FORMULA .
The relative strength of the two competing effects (Doppler shift and
horizon displacement) is given by FORMULA , which can be
above or below one.
Ergo, both temperatures (in the kink frame and in the laboratory
frame) may increase or decrease due to the back-reaction of Hawking
radiation, i.e., the heat capacity can be positive or negative
(or even infinite – at the turning point where FORMULA ).
Similar ambiguities apply to the entropy FORMULA .
Choosing FORMULA  just reproduces the entropy
balance of the Hawking radiation in the exterior region – which is of
course indeed thermal.
Inserting the kinetic energy FORMULA , on the other
hand, we could violate the 2nd law since the kink can be
slowed down by incident coherent radiation (carrying zero entropy).
Conclusions   Modeling the black hole (horizon) by a stable topological defect in
the form of a kink, we were able to derive the quantum back-reaction
of the resulting evaporation process.
It turns out that the kink/horizon is also pushed inwards as in a
real black hole but, in contrast to the gravitational case, this
back-reaction force is not caused by energy conservation but by
momentum balance.
Energetically, the expansion of the horizon would be favorable because
the minimum energy density in exterior region FORMULA  is far
above FORMULA  the ground state in the interior region.
Hence, going beyond the linear analysis performed here, one might
suspect that the FORMULA  field approaches its ground state via
non-linear (quantum) instabilities until the evaporation stops.
Further thermodynamical concepts such as heat capacity or entropy
(variation) cannot be defined unambiguously and can have both signs –
depending on the considered parameters {{cite:3ac3fb88-f9f0-4553-867f-6031d5f91b6f}}.
Together with the results in {{cite:439af7b0-a8e1-4482-97ce-43ac62d0c17a}}, our calculations and the
energy-momentum considerations above suggest that Hawking radiation and
the resulting back-reaction force “pushing” the horizon inwards may
be universal – whereas the heat capacity and the entropy concept
strongly depend on the underlying structure (e.g., Einstein
equations).
Note that in the Israel-Hartle-Hawking state with the expectation
value being
FORMULA , the horizon
is still pushed inwards – i.e., it does not correspond to the thermal
equilibrium state for the combined system
[kink in Eq. (REF ) plus FORMULA  field].
R. S. acknowledges valuable discussions with Ted Jacobson, Bill Unruh,
Renaud Parentani, and others at the workshop From Quantum to
Emergent Gravity: Theory and Phenomenology
(SISSA, Trieste, Italy 2007) and support by the Emmy-Noether Programme
of the German Research Foundation (DFG, SCHU 1557/1-2).
C. M. is indebted to G. Matsas for the support, the ITP at TU Dresden
for the hospitality and Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do
Estado de São Paulo for financial support.
FORMULA  schuetz@theory.phy.tu-dresden.de
