
[Gravitational Quenching by Clumpy Accretion]
Gravitational Quenching in Massive Galaxies and Clusters by Clumpy Accretion
[A. Dekel, Y. Birnboim]
Avishai DekelFORMULA , Yuval Birnboim FORMULA
FORMULA Racah Institute of Physics, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91904 Israel
dekel@phys.huji.ac.il; yuval@phys.huji.ac.il
REF –REF  2002
We consider a simple gravitational-heating mechanism for the long-term
quenching of cooling flows and star formation in massive dark-matter haloes
hosting elliptical galaxies and clusters. The virial shock heating in haloes
FORMULA  triggers
natural quenching in FORMULA  haloes
{{cite:71606811-9a15-4672-a7da-f357a5867a3e}}. Analytic estimates and simple simulations argue that
the long-term quenching in haloes FORMULA 
could be due to the gravitational energy of cosmological accretion delivered to
the inner-halo hot gas by cold flows
via ram-pressure drag and local shocks. FORMULA  is obtained by comparing the
gravitational power of infall into the potential well with the overall
radiative cooling rate. The heating wins if the gas inner density cusp is not
steeper than FORMULA  and if the masses in the cold and hot phases
are comparable.
The effect is stronger at higher redshifts, making the maintenance easier
also at later times.
Particular energy carriers into the halo core are
cold gas clumps of FORMULA .
Clumps FORMULA  penetrate to the inner halo
with sufficient kinetic energy
before they
disintegrate, but they have to be FORMULA 
for the drag to do enough work
in a Hubble time. Pressure confined FORMULA K
clumps are stable against their own gravity and remain gaseous once
below the Bonnor-Ebert mass FORMULA . Such clumps are also immune to
tidal disruption. Clumps in the desired mass range could emerge by thermal
instability in the outer halo or in the filaments that feed it if the
conductivity is not too high. Alternatively, such clumps may be embedded in
dark-matter subhaloes if the ionizing flux is ineffective, but they separate
from their subhaloes by ram pressure before entering the inner halo.
Heating by dynamical friction becomes dominant for massive satellites,
which can contribute up to one third of the total gravitational heating.
We conclude that
gravitational heating by cosmological accretion
is a viable alternative to AGN feedback as a
long-term quenching mechanism.
accretion —
dark matter —
cooling flows —
galaxies: clusters —
galaxies: ellipticals —
galaxies: evolution —
galaxies: formation —
galaxies: haloes —
Introduction
The observed properties of red & dead elliptical galaxies indicate a
robust quenching of star formation above a threshold corresponding to
halo mass FORMULA ,
effective especially
after a characteristic redshift FORMULA 
{{cite:5aa48529-943a-4a92-99b3-80fee7a23f60}}.
Similar quenching is required in order to suppress cooling flows in clusters,
i.e., in halos FORMULA  {{cite:a2cad2de-faff-45b7-8d79-2e9432e9629a}}.
In turn, semi-analytic simulations show that the introduction of quenching
above a threshold halo mass
(sometimes accompanied by a critical black-hole or bulge mass)
is a crucial element in any model that tries to fit the data
concerning the distribution of galaxy properties
{{cite:cf63b9b7-40a3-4ad5-a6ef-5f0db2957481}}, {{cite:34891650-c96d-4ac3-a1c8-451e4a628f2d}}, {{cite:a20f5bc1-e235-4439-85af-9b42ce99ed0f}}.
The desired quenching mechanism should provide the required energy over time
and explain its coupling to the whole gas reservoir in the inner dark halo.
It needs to address both the trigger  of quenching and its long-term
maintenance  for many Hubble times,
as well as the characteristic mass and redshift associated with it.
There is an ongoing intensive effort to study “AGN feedback" as the potential
source of quenching. At this point, the physics of AGN feedback, e.g.,
how it couples to the extended halo gas and how it provides long-term
maintenance, are still difficult open issues
{{cite:b3ec2b0d-60f8-4f89-99ea-39751b539610}}.
The bright quasars have been argued to be capable of providing long-term
feedback via radiation despite their short lifetimes {{cite:ed140837-2d0f-4e3b-9113-08919f7bb7d3}},
but perhaps more natural sources for self-regulated AGN feedback are
the weaker radio-loud AGNs that radiate for a long time at low power
{{cite:20ea1f3d-3f6d-4d4b-a134-cb59393640c0}}.
In either case, the desired characteristic mass and redshift do not
emerge in an obvious way from the black-hole physics.
Gaseous major mergers, which were suggested as the trigger for quenching
via starbursts or quasar activation {{cite:4a7b9e7f-1888-4d04-8a33-4a52ebb6193f}}, also have hard time
providing a satisfactory explanation for the characteristic mass,
and it is not clear that their frequency and the associated starburst
efficiencies are sufficient for the purpose
{{cite:f21288f8-8e7f-44fd-96de-305497e0d5a7}}, , {{cite:8a197270-b31c-4e4e-a705-74d79c37a324}}.
Here we pursue a preliminary feasibility test of a very simple alternative,
that the gravitational energy
associated with the cosmological accretion
of baryons into the dark-matter haloes
is the dominant source of quenching, responsible both for its trigger
and its maintenance.
The trivial fact that the baryons tend to segregate from the dark matter
and condense at the bottom of halo potential wells implies that they
bring in energy that must dissipate and could keep the halo gas hot.
Our earlier analysis {{cite:b218c686-f943-414a-b7b6-994f02fbed1c}}, {{cite:5aa48529-943a-4a92-99b3-80fee7a23f60}}, based on either analytic calculations
or simulations in the idealized case of spherical symmetry,
explained the existence of a robust threshold halo mass for a stable shock at
the virial radius, FORMULA .
This is a refinement of the classical idea attributing galaxy formation to
cooling on a dynamical time scale {{cite:976ea8bf-b0cf-47e7-a816-134146311497}}, {{cite:22c6ab6f-80d5-43c3-a8fe-13f8b3249e36}}, {{cite:3263617d-985b-43f0-a80a-b4b84dc9edd1}}, {{cite:cad2d76f-5572-4797-b752-b13565fbe980}}, {{cite:55cb3393-a017-474d-b36d-461d0609babe}}.
{{cite:b218c686-f943-414a-b7b6-994f02fbed1c}} showed that in halos below the threshold mass, rapid cooling
prevents the post-shock gas pressure from supporting the shock against
gravitational collapse. In this case, the gas flows
cold (FORMULA K) into the inner halo, where it may eventually shock,
form a disk and possibly generate an efficient mode of star formation.
When the halo grows above FORMULA , a stable shock propagates
toward the virial radius, halting the infalling gas and creating a hot
medium in quasi-static equilibrium at the halo virial temperature.
The transition to shock stability occurs when the standard radiative cooling
time equals the time for compression behind the shock,
FORMULA ,
where FORMULA  is the gas density behind the shock,
FORMULA  is the shock radius and FORMULA  is the infall velocity into the shock.
Early indications for cold accretion versus shock virialization
as a function of redshift originated from three-dimensional cosmological
simulations {{cite:92dc81d0-9c75-4e9e-b0b2-06196f60a0a2}}, {{cite:6a4e964c-fe96-42d1-9012-aed1a0b72837}}, {{cite:b17e6635-8545-4d26-9856-911007d46994}}.
Advanced cosmological simulations solidified the transition to a hot
medium at a critical halo mass in parallel with the theoretical understanding
of the effect
{{cite:01484d0e-ceda-48cb-9745-23fea408df37}}, {{cite:690548af-87ed-48d3-ac9b-e82f03cb0709}}, {{cite:5aa48529-943a-4a92-99b3-80fee7a23f60}}, {{cite:71606811-9a15-4672-a7da-f357a5867a3e}}.
This has become the standard lore used in modeling of galaxy formation
{{cite:cf63b9b7-40a3-4ad5-a6ef-5f0db2957481}}, {{cite:34891650-c96d-4ac3-a1c8-451e4a628f2d}}, {{cite:a20f5bc1-e235-4439-85af-9b42ce99ed0f}}.
The introduction of a hot medium filling the halo
is a natural trigger for quenching of
cold gas supply. This is either directly, by shock heating of all the gas,
or indirectly, by providing a hot dilute medium that is vulnerable to heating
by sources such as AGN feedback. This very naturally
explains the origin of the characteristic threshold halo mass
responsible for the galaxy bimodality {{cite:5aa48529-943a-4a92-99b3-80fee7a23f60}}.
While the role of virial shock heating as the trigger for quenching
and as a necessary condition for maintenance
are becoming widely appreciated, we address here the novel idea that the
accretion itself may also be the dominant source of energy
for long-term maintenance, without appealing to AGN feedback
or in parallel to it.
Using spherical hydro simulations, {{cite:71606811-9a15-4672-a7da-f357a5867a3e}} have found that
a uniform  virial accretion at the average cosmological rate
leads by itself to effective long-term quenching starting at FORMULA 
in halos of masses FORMULA  today,
namely in groups of galaxies.
This is a generic sequence of events, termed SAMBA (for Shocked-Accretion
Massive Burst and Shutdown), due to a moderate
accretion rate through a rapidly
expanding virial shock. The long-term quenching
follows an earlier tentative quenching phase, when the halo is FORMULA , and a subsequent, rapid, massive accretion
of FORMULA  of gas into the inner halo.
Cosmological simulations by {{cite:c4fd2ee8-b82f-45ab-b244-4a85da3f8339}} and {{cite:efa13a6d-f9cc-48de-8960-4f8f2b87d795}}
provide first clues that such a mechanism may actually work once the
numerical resolution is sufficient for resolving small clumps
{{cite:50aca558-900e-4144-8ef6-0cb6af83d178}}, {{cite:05fc356e-846e-4de1-9805-3f5f59210c53}}, {{cite:fdee063e-3a9f-4991-a56f-8730d5c69ae2}}.
However, {{cite:71606811-9a15-4672-a7da-f357a5867a3e}} found that uniform spherical accretion does not
provide long-term quenching in halos more massive than FORMULA .
This is because the accretion rate was too high at the early time
when the halo was FORMULA .
We address here a more robust phenomenon that is also valid in more massive
haloes and in realistic cosmological geometries, where the gravitational
energy of accretion is the potential source of long-term quenching
maintenance.
Both {{cite:71606811-9a15-4672-a7da-f357a5867a3e}} and {{cite:d22a997a-2427-4f98-86a0-44d51eab7506}} have made preliminary attempts
at addressing the potential of a scenario along these lines,
assuming that the energy is transferred to the inner-halo gas via clumps.
It is important to note that heating by dynamical friction acting on
subhaloes, which is a non-negligible energy source, is insufficient
for balancing the cooling rate {{cite:89b46f03-2998-4303-a4cf-cd34895c921c}}, {{cite:9c1568d8-d52d-4cc5-9bb0-5bc8a9ea5a26}}, {{cite:43625509-06a4-4e97-9af2-0799296d7933}}, {{cite:d22a997a-2427-4f98-86a0-44d51eab7506}}.
We rather focus here on the effect of ram-pressure drag (or shocks)
exerted by a hot ambient gas  on cold gas  clumps.We
refer in this paper to FORMULA K clumps as “cold", to distinguish them from
“warm" gas at FORMULA K and “hot", X-ray emitting gas of FORMULA K.
Similar clumps are sometimes referred to as “warm", reserving the term
“cold" to gas that has cooled by molecular cooling to FORMULA K.
In § we find analytically that the overall gravitational
accretion power is adequate for keeping the halo gas hot in halos above a
threshold mass FORMULA , provided that the energy
is deposited in the inner halo. We evaluate the scaling with redshift,
density profiles, gas fractions and metallicity.
In § we work out constraints on the clump masses,
FORMULA , necessary
for effective heating by drag of the hot gas in the inner halo.
In § we present simple simulations that confirm the analytic estimates
and demonstrate the potential of keeping the halo gas hot by clumpy accretion.
After sketching the method of simulation,
we analyze the time evolution of individual clumps,
and use the results for the heating-to-cooling ratio inside the halo
to obtain the constraints on halo and clump masses.
In § we discuss the possible role of dynamical friction,
the physics of dissipation via turbulence, and the possible origin of clumps
by thermal instability of inside subhaloes.
In § we conclude our findings.

Global Heating versus Cooling: Minimum Halo Mass
The gravitational energy associated with infall into massive haloes is
clearly a viable source for quenching because, by virtue of the virial theorem
itself, it is comparable to the overall thermal energy
{{cite:aa73b176-5b14-4911-9d52-9a3716dd543c}}.
As argued by {{cite:d22a997a-2427-4f98-86a0-44d51eab7506}}, this gravitational energy can compete
with the popular energy source of feedback from a central AGN.
For a total stellar mass FORMULA , the gravitational energy
is FORMULA , while the AGN feedback
can be expressed as FORMULA , so the ratio of the two is
FORMULA . This is of order unity for typical escape velocities in big ellipticals
and clusters and for typical AGN efficiencies.
Unlike the AGN energy which is likely to heat the densest gas and largely
get radiated away, the gravitational heating can be deposited much more
uniformly so less energy is wasted as radiation.
A necessary condition for the accretion to provide an effective quenching
mechanism is that there is enough gravitational power in the accretion to
overcome the overall rate of energy loss by radiative cooling.
By considering first this global  requirement
we will obtain here a robust lower limit
for the halo mass in which gravitational quenching is possible.
In the following sections we will obtain limits on the clump masses by
considering the energy balance in the inner  halo, with the
heating provided specifically by ram-pressure drag on cold clumps.
Halo Equilibrium Profiles
In order to evaluate the rates of heating versus cooling
we use a simple model for
gas in hydrostatic equilibrium within the potential well of a
spherical dark-matter halo.
The halo virial mass FORMULA  and radius FORMULA  are defined in the standard way
such that the mean
mass over-density within FORMULA  relative to the cosmological background
is FORMULA . Recall that the cosmological density is FORMULA ,
with FORMULA  the universal expansion factor,
and in a flat universe FORMULA  varies from FORMULA 
at FORMULA  to FORMULA  at FORMULA 
{{cite:71ba39d6-3d73-4f2d-b5f2-15c78dd831d1}}, {{cite:5aa48529-943a-4a92-99b3-80fee7a23f60}}.
The mean mass density within the virial radius is then expressed conveniently
as
FORMULA 

FORMULA 
With the virial velocity FORMULA , writing
FORMULA , FORMULA 
and FORMULA ,
the standard virial relations can be written as
FORMULA 
We assume that the total and the hot-gas density profiles are
both of a generalized  NFW functional form,
FORMULA 
They can be parameterized by the inner slope FORMULA , the
mass FORMULA  within the virial radius, and the concentration
parameter FORMULA . We denote the total
hot-gas mass within the virial radius by FORMULA .
The concentration, for each of the two components,
is assumed to follow the cosmological average for dark-matter haloes
{{cite:5b34f4f1-d2cd-41bb-b48b-94624eb32d60}},
FORMULA 
Hydrostatic equilibrium requires at every radius  FORMULA
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the total mass within FORMULA ,
FORMULA  and FORMULA  are the gas density and temperature profiles,
FORMULA  is the Boltzmann constant and FORMULA 
with FORMULA  the proton mass.
Thus, for given density profiles, we can evaluate the temperature profile via
FORMULA 
with the external boundary condition set by the virial temperature
at  FORMULA
FORMULA 
or in the cosmological context
FORMULA 
The entropy profile is then proportional to
FORMULA 
FIGURE 
In our fiducial model we assume an NFW cusp for the total mass,
FORMULA , and a constant-density core for the gas,
FORMULA , with FORMULA .
The resultant profiles are shown in Fig. REF .
The gas temperature is only weakly varying about the virial temperature.
The entropy is rising at large radii and is approaching a constant entropy floor
at small radii, in qualitative agreement with the typical profiles indicated
by X-ray observations {{cite:ae524895-3c47-4ff9-baad-20e161f55443}}, {{cite:b09dc8e8-07cd-4959-ab49-b29849a56f15}}
and with those obtained in hydrodynamical simulations of clusters
{{cite:58b2ca53-1243-429b-ad34-b487b8d557cf}}.
Shown for comparison is a case with a gas cusp,
FORMULA , for which the temperature is still roughly constant,
but the entropy is improperly rising even at small radii.
For the purpose of analytic estimates,
we note that the generalized NFW mass profile of eq. (REF )
can be written as
FORMULA 
where for an FORMULA  cusp
FORMULA 
and for an FORMULA  core
FORMULA 

Heating Rate by Gravitational Accretion
We write the available gravitational accretion power as
FORMULA 
The first term represents the gain in potential energy by infall of clumpy
gas from the
virial radius to an inner radius FORMULA , given an accretion rate
FORMULA .
The second term is the contribution of kinetic energy associated with the
typical velocities FORMULA  of the clumps at the virial radius.
The third term represents the energy wasted for unbinding infalling cold
clumps and heating them to the halo virial temperature.
Given the density profiles, the potential gain is
FORMULA 
with FORMULA .
For our fiducial NFW potential well, FORMULA ,
FORMULA 
With FORMULA , we have FORMULA , so FORMULA  and
FORMULA .
In comparison, a singular isothermal sphere has FORMULA ,
namely FORMULA .
The average virial accretion rate onto haloes of mass FORMULA  at
redshift FORMULA  can be estimated using the EPS formalism,
following {{cite:c62c50a5-2478-4bb2-aced-966fda613092}} and as described in Appendix A of {{cite:71606811-9a15-4672-a7da-f357a5867a3e}}.
We use the practical approximation for haloes near FORMULA 
in FORMULA CDM,
FORMULA 
This is consistent with the estimates from cosmological N-body simulations
{{cite:18a8caf9-aa5a-4668-a321-873a31c01c86}}, {{cite:3f583c08-d56d-476b-a53e-abcc83537aa4}}.
The accretion rate of clumps is assumed to be FORMULA .
Thus, for an NFW potential,
the heating rate from eq. (REF ), in terms of the total thermal energy, is
FORMULA 
The strong redshift dependence is due to the higher specific accretion rate
at higher redshifts, and note the relative insensitivity to FORMULA .

Radiative Cooling Rate
The radiative cooling rate per unit mass,
at a position where the gas density, temperature
and metallicity are FORMULA , FORMULA  and FORMULA , is
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  and FORMULA  is the atomic cooling function.
We use the standard cooling function computed by {{cite:bfbf81e6-2815-402a-996f-c4fe4f2ef9b9}},
which is consistent with the equilibrium state computed by {{cite:4eac1c2b-de89-4714-bfe4-f9eb8c1b7ffe}}.
At a radius FORMULA  within the halo, the cooling rate becomes
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA  and the gas density profile is expressed in a
dimensionless way by
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  from eq. (REF ).
We define
FORMULA ,
and note that for FORMULA , the value of FORMULA  is
between FORMULA  and 6 for metallicities ranging from zero to solar abundance.
For our fiducial gas profile, FORMULA , we have
FORMULA 
With FORMULA , it is FORMULA , FORMULA 
and FORMULA .
The overall cooling rate of the hot gas is
FORMULA 
Because of the proportionality to FORMULA , the integral is
dominated by the cooling near the inner radius FORMULA .
For our fiducial gas profile,
with FORMULA , and approximating FORMULA  based on Fig. REF 
such that FORMULA  is independent of FORMULA , we obtain
[to an accuracy of FORMULA ]
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  the cooling rate of eq. (REF ) where FORMULA .
This gives a total cooling rate relative to the thermal energy
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  and FORMULA  is given in eq. (REF ),
e.g., FORMULA .
Note the strong decrease of this specific cooling rate with increasing
FORMULA  and increasing redshift, the latter being dominated by FORMULA .
For comparison with X-ray observations, we note that
the total cooling rate from our fiducial halo model is
FORMULA 
For FORMULA  at FORMULA  the virial temperature is
FORMULA K. Then with FORMULA  we have FORMULA 
so FORMULA .
This is indeed comparable to the observed X-ray output of
FORMULA 
from giant ellipticals and groups of virial halo mass in the ball-park
of FORMULA  {{cite:cb96524e-9db9-48d0-8a73-ac4f9e613278}}, {{cite:6a486551-da2c-42bb-8eec-464c4225f1fb}}, {{cite:9238b919-6a6f-4172-b80c-4d5d76076ec6}}, {{cite:8e8ce789-c272-427e-8564-45ea38f7e8a0}}.
In particular, the observed scaling with dispersion velocity {{cite:de6e4feb-b154-48de-9b82-f4629e37c52a}}
can be translated to
FORMULA ,
quite similar to the mass dependence inferred from eq. (REF ).
This indicates that our fiducial halo model is roughly compatible with
X-ray observations, and that in fact we have no much freedom in choosing
a hot gas fraction that is very different from the 5% assumed.
For an analytic estimate of the cooling rate
one could use the practical approximation by
{{cite:5aa48529-943a-4a92-99b3-80fee7a23f60}} to the cooling function,
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is related to the virial mass in eq. (REF ),
and FORMULA .
We also adopt in our fiducial case the redshift evolution of the mean
metallicity as crudely estimated by {{cite:5aa48529-943a-4a92-99b3-80fee7a23f60}},
FORMULA 

Global H/Q: Minimum Halo Mass
The ratio of global heating to cooling rate, FORMULA , is computed numerically
for any given choice of FORMULA  and FORMULA .
The heating rate FORMULA , as computed from eq. (REF ) and
eq. (REF ) with FORMULA ,
is divided by FORMULA , as evaluated from eq. (REF ) with eq. (REF ).
Figure REF  shows the resultant global FORMULA  as a function of halo mass.
In the fiducial case we obtain
FORMULA  for
FORMULA 
This is the lower limit for haloes that permit gravitational quenching.
We see that at FORMULA , where the natural quenching by
shocked accretion is no longer effective {{cite:71606811-9a15-4672-a7da-f357a5867a3e}},
the quenching can in principle be provided by gravitational heating,
once the energy is deposited in the inner halo.
At FORMULA , FORMULA , while in
cluster haloes of FORMULA , the energy available
for gravitational heating overwhelms the cooling rate, FORMULA .
The almost linear dependence of FORMULA  on FORMULA  is driven by the dependence of
the heating rate per unit mass on the potential well,
FORMULA , while the cooling rate per unit mass is a
weaker function of halo mass.
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
For the fiducial profiles with FORMULA  and FORMULA ,
we obtain an analytic expression for FORMULA  by dividing eq. (REF )
and eq. (REF ),
FORMULA 
We can express FORMULA  in terms of the parameters FORMULA , FORMULA , FORMULA , and
FORMULA , by inserting
FORMULA  from eq. (REF ),
FORMULA  from eq. (REF ),
FORMULA ,
FORMULA  from eq. (REF ) with FORMULA  from eq. (REF )
and FORMULA  from eq. (REF ).
Using these approximations,
we recover the fiducial critical value of FORMULA ,
and obtain its crude scaling with the parameters:
FORMULA 
Some of these scalings are
reflected in the two additional curves of Fig. REF , referring to
variations of FORMULA  and FORMULA  about the fiducial case.
At FORMULA , the heating is more efficient and we learn that FORMULA  is reduced to
FORMULA .
With a higher fraction of hot gas and a lower fraction of mass
in clumps, FORMULA  and FORMULA ,
we see that FORMULA ,
such that gravitational heating can barely do the job.
Figure REF  shows the redshift dependence of FORMULA ,
defined by FORMULA , for otherwise the fiducial choice of parameters.
By FORMULA , the minimum mass drops to FORMULA , allowing
gravitational quenching over the whole mass range where a shock-heated
medium is present.
The increase in heating rate due to the higher accretion rate
(FORMULA ) and higher FORMULA  (FORMULA ) at higher FORMULA 
is almost balanced by the increase in cooling rate due to the higher density
(FORMULA ),
leading to the apparent weak explicit dependence of FORMULA  on redshift in
eq. (REF ).
The residual FORMULA  dependence of FORMULA  at a given FORMULA 
is dominated by the decrease of FORMULA  (FORMULA ) with redshift,
aided by the corresponding decrease of FORMULA  via FORMULA  and FORMULA .
In a more realistic dynamical calculation, one can expect
the over-heating at high FORMULA  to induce an expansion of the gas core,
reducing FORMULA  and FORMULA  there. This is expected to improve the quenching
efficiency at later times and thus reduce FORMULA  there (work in progress).
Figure REF  displays the dependence of FORMULA 
on the inner density profiles of gas and dark matter in equilibrium.
The dependence on the total density slope FORMULA  is rather weak.
For a constant-density gas core, FORMULA , any reasonable value for the
total density slope
in the range FORMULA  would provide enough gravitational potential
gain for balancing the cooling rate in FORMULA  haloes.
Naturally, an isothermal density cusp (FORMULA ) provides a higher
potential gain than a flat density core (FORMULA ).
We also find (not plotted) that the sensitivity to how deep in the potential
well the energy deposit occurs is also rather weak, less than a factor of
FORMULA  in FORMULA  as long as the energy deposit occurs inside FORMULA .
The sensitivity to the gas profile is stronger, through the cooling rate.
For an NFW potential well, the gas core has to be FORMULA  for
FORMULA  in FORMULA  haloes.
Once the gas profile is too cuspy, FORMULA ,
only haloes above FORMULA  can be quenched.
If FORMULA  is as steep as FORMULA , the cooling rate becomes so high that
it cannot be balanced by gravitational heating even in cluster haloes of FORMULA .
FIGURE 
Figure REF  shows the dependence of FORMULA 
on the mass fractions in hot gas versus cold clumps, FORMULA  and FORMULA .
The total gas fraction imposes a constraint on the way these parameters
can vary, FORMULA 
This could be at most the universal baryonic fraction, FORMULA .
A more realistic estimate would be FORMULA , after
subtracting the mass fraction of baryons in stars and those removed by
feedback processes.
With a total gas fraction of FORMULA , one needs FORMULA  for quenching
FORMULA  haloes. A ratio of FORMULA 
would be enough for quenching FORMULA  haloes.
We also find (not plotted) that the effect of increasing today's metallicity
from FORMULA  to FORMULA  is only a FORMULA  increase in FORMULA .
FIGURE 
The robust result is that for a broad and sensible range of values
of the model parameters, once today's halo is of FORMULA 
or higher, there is in principle enough total power in the accretion
available for keeping the halo gas hot.
We conclude that the clumpy accretion scenario passes the first
feasibility test: it carries enough gravitational power to overcome
the overall cooling rate in haloes that host groups and big elliptical
galaxies, and more power than necessary in clusters of galaxies.
The key is of course to have enough of this energy deposited in the inner halo,
where most of the cooling tends to occur. This is addressed next, leading
to constraints on the range of masses for the clumps that can serve as heating
agents.

Heating by Gas Clumps
The actual accretion is aspherical and clumpy.
The interaction of the infalling cold, dense gas  clumps with the
hot medium present in FORMULA  haloes,
via ram-pressure drag and weak shocks, transfers energy into the
gas and keeps it hot.
The effect of dynamical friction, which is dominant for the most
massive subhaloes, will be discussed in §.
Ram-Pressure Drag on a Clump
In our analytic estimates,
we consider a population of dense, cold gas clumps of mass FORMULA  each,
falling radially at the virial velocity FORMULA  through
a halo of mass FORMULA  containing hot-gas mass FORMULA .
We assume that the clumps keep an internal temperature of FORMULA K,
where the atomic cooling function drops sharply and where the suppression
of further cooling may be assisted by photoionization due to an
external UV flux.
The clumps are assumed to be in pressure equilibrium with a hot
medium at the virial temperature, FORMULA .
Since the pressure in each of the gas components is FORMULA ,
the pressure confinement implies that at any position within the halo
the densities of the cold and hot phases are related by
FORMULA 
The implied clump radius is
FORMULA 
describing the clump shrinkage as it moves into the higher density regions
of the inner halo.
The amplitude of the drag force acting by the hot medium on a cloud is
FORMULA 
where FORMULA , independent of whether the motion is sonic or supersonic
{{cite:2093ca7c-2f61-4eb5-b79e-4ea5a276a1bf}}The value of FORMULA 
for a spherical clump varies from
0.4 to unity and back to 0.8 in the sub-sonic, trans-sonic and super-sonic
regimes respectively.
Thus, the deceleration of a cloud due to drag in terms of
the characteristic gravitational acceleration FORMULA  is
FORMULA 
This implies that
less massive clumps suffer a stronger deceleration, which naturally
gets stronger with increasing ambient gas density. In turn, the rate
of drag work done by the whole clump population of a given total mass
is also FORMULA .
For a numerical estimate in the cosmological context,
we use the top-hat virial relation, eq. (REF ), to obtain
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA 
In our fiducial case, FORMULA  at FORMULA , we have
FORMULA .
The deceleration can then be written as
FORMULA 
The work done per unit clump mass as it falls from radius FORMULA  to FORMULA 
is then
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is a dimensionless integral
FORMULA 
For our fiducial gas profile this is
FORMULA 
With FORMULA , we have FORMULA  and FORMULA  at FORMULA .
Then for infall from FORMULA  to FORMULA  the integral is FORMULA 
and FORMULA .
Hydrodynamical simulations indicate that most of the work done by the
ram-pressure drag is
indeed deposited in the ambient gas rather than in the dense clumps
{{cite:2813895e-165d-4c65-8320-ee6ae3be55bb}}, {{cite:e8b98a74-749b-4861-b9bf-bc50be86eef3}}. This implies that the clumps can serve as
efficient heating agents, partly through the generation of turbulence (see
§).
The challenge is to have the clumps heat the gas in the inner halo,
where its density peaks and the cooling rate is high.
The clumps have to penetrate  to the inner halo before they are
stopped by the drag or destroyed by fragmentation due to hydrodynamical
instabilities. This imposes a lower bound on the clump mass.
On the other hand, the drag work has to be effective such that it overcomes
the radiative energy losses. This imposes an upper bound on the clump mass
for a given halo mass.

Penetration: Minimum Clump Mass
A necessary condition for a clump to be effective in heating the gas
at the halo core is that it penetrates into the core with a velocity higher
than the virial velocity, accelerated by gravity despite the drag.
Then it brings in more energy than is needed for heating the clump itself
to the virial temperature when it melts into the hot medium.
Such a penetration is possible only if the drag work done on the clump
while it falls from FORMULA  to FORMULA  at a velocity FORMULA  does not
exceed the corresponding potential gain,
FORMULA 
If this inequality is not obeyed, the clump rapid infall velocity must
be slowed down by the drag before it reaches the inner core.
Substituting FORMULA  from eq. (REF ), the constraint for penetration in a Hubble
time becomes
FORMULA 
The second equality, here and below, refers to
our fiducial case of FORMULA  at FORMULA .In
order to reach the core in a Hubble time rather than in a crossing time
FORMULA , the average infall velocity should be FORMULA ,
reducing the drag by a factor FORMULA  and thus
reducing the minimum clump mass by a factor of FORMULA .
This estimate assumes that the clump retains its initial mass as it
moves through the halo. A higher lower bound may be obtained when
clump fragmentation is taken into account.
The clump ploughing through the hot medium suffers
Kelvin-Helmholtz and Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities,
which eventually make it break into smaller fragments.
Simulations show that this happens roughly once the clump has ploughed
through a distance FORMULA  corresponding to a gas column of mass
comparable to the clump mass {{cite:2813895e-165d-4c65-8320-ee6ae3be55bb}}.
This is equivalent to the intuitive requirement that the impulse exerted by
the drag, FORMULA , is comparable to the momentum of the clump, FORMULA ,
making it capable of breaking the clump up. We note that the
corresponding timescale for breakup can actually be
larger than the timescale associated with the fastest linear growing mode
of the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability {{cite:48aed91e-382e-4982-868b-0c1a07303746}}. The fragmentation
is slowed down by the confining pressure, similarly to the slow-down that
occurs when the clump is self-gravitating.
Thus, a clump of initial mass FORMULA  on an inward radial orbit from radius
FORMULA  would fragment at radius FORMULA  which obeys
FORMULA 
Using the expression for the drag work, eq. (REF ), this translates to
fragmentation at an FORMULA  that obeys
FORMULA 
A comparison of eq. (REF ) with eq. (REF ) implies that clumps that
could have made it to the halo core [by obeying eq. (REF )]
may fragment before they have reached the core.
For our fiducial gas profile, eq. (REF ) becomes
FORMULA 
We now assume that at FORMULA  the clump fragments into FORMULA  new clumps
of mass FORMULA  each, and allow them to penetrate further till they fragment
again by the same rule.
If FORMULA , the fragments do not penetrate much beyond
the first FORMULA . In order to penetrate from FORMULA  to FORMULA  before fragmentation
occurs, the clump has to be as massive as
FORMULA 
If, on the other hand, FORMULA  is of order a few,
the penetration following each fragmentation
could be substantial. For example, Fig. REF  shows the penetration of
clumps of different initial masses at the halo virial radius,
under the assumptions of fragmentation into two pieces at a time, FORMULA ,
at radii that are obtained by a repetitive use of eq. (REF ),
in our fiducial halo.
We see that in this case clumps of initial mass significantly smaller than
FORMULA  can never make it to the inner halo.
Clumps of FORMULA  make it into the inner halo
once, while clumps that are significantly larger penetrate through and
orbit about the center more than once before they are completely destroyed.
Thus, as long as the clump does not completely disintegrate in its first
fragmentation event, our estimate of the lower limit imposed by
penetration with fragmentation is roughly
FORMULA 
FIGURE 
It is worth noting that the effectiveness of clumps that lie significantly
above the minimum mass and thus safely make it into the core is not affected by
the fragmentation, as it is determined by the depth of the potential well.
For small clumps, however, the fragmentation enhances the drag deceleration
and can therefore prevent a clump that would have otherwise reached the core
from actually doing so. This tightens the lower bound that were
obtained before considering the fragmentation.
The lower limit on FORMULA  scales strongly with FORMULA , mostly through FORMULA  and
partly through FORMULA  (via FORMULA ). At FORMULA , for FORMULA ,
the minimum FORMULA  drops by a factor of FORMULA  compared to its value at
FORMULA .
The scaling with halo mass is such that the minimum FORMULA  at FORMULA 
drops by a factor of FORMULA  when the mass grows to FORMULA .
The decrease of FORMULA  with increasing FORMULA  or FORMULA  originates from the
corresponding increase in FORMULA . This increases the confining pressure,
which makes the clump shrink (at a given mass), thus reducing
the drag force (eq. REF ), and allowing better penetration with later
fragmentation.

Effective Heating: Maximum Clump Mass
Clumps that are massive enough to make it into the halo core
should not be too massive; otherwise they fail to dissipate enough of their
energy in a Hubble time.
We can now address the heating-to-cooling balance with the heating
computed from the actual drag work rather than the available potential well.
Assuming that each clump is performing its act for a Hubble time as it orbits
back and forth in the halo, and noting that the Hubble time is always
about 5.5 times longer than the virial crossing time FORMULA ,
we can estimate the drag work per unit mass as
FORMULA  and thus require for effective drag that
FORMULA 
This translates to
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the global heating-to-cooling ratio as evaluated in
eq. (REF ) and plotted in Fig. REF .
The implied upper bound is a straightforward modification of eq. (REF ),
FORMULA 
where the last equality is for our fiducial case where FORMULA .
The upper limit of eq. (REF ) is likely to be too tight.
First, massive clumps are expected to speed up beyond FORMULA  due to the
gravitational pull to the halo center, causing a significant enhancement
in the drag force. If the velocity becomes twice as high along parts of
the orbit, say, the instantaneous drag force is four times larger,
so the upper limit on FORMULA  may increase by an order of magnitude.
Second, the successive fragmentation can increase the drag work by clumps
that start more massive than this limit. According to the condition for
fragmentation, eq. (REF ), the number of crossings FORMULA 
of a distance FORMULA 
before the first fragmentation can be estimated by
FORMULA , namely
FORMULA 
This implies that even a clump as massive as FORMULA  in a fiducial halo
of FORMULA  would fragment before crossing the distance FORMULA  three
times, and the consequent enhanced deceleration by drag would give it a
chance to deposit enough energy by drag work in a Hubble time.
The actual, more relaxed upper limit on FORMULA  will be evaluated more accurately
using simulations below.
Note that the condition for effective drag in eq. (REF )
does not guarantee that
the apocenter of the clump's orbit decays into the core in a Hubble
time. The condition for this is rather FORMULA ,
so the corresponding upper limit is lower by FORMULA .
This implies that clumps near the upper limit can deposit enough energy
during their passages through the core without being fully confined to
the core.
The scaling of the upper limit on FORMULA  in eq. (REF ) with FORMULA  and FORMULA 
is dominated by the dependence of FORMULA  on these parameters (Fig. REF )
which is partly balanced by the opposite trends of FORMULA  discussed
in §REF .
Changing the mass to FORMULA  at FORMULA , the maximum FORMULA 
is increased by a factor of FORMULA . This change is driven by
the dependence of the heating rate per unit mass on FORMULA .
Moving to FORMULA  at a fixed halo mass, the maximum FORMULA  is increased
by a factor of FORMULA .

Bonnor-Ebert Stability: Maximum Clumps
For the clumps to be effective in heating the inner halo gas they have
to remain gaseous as they travel through the halo. This means that their
inner pressure should support them against collapse due to their own self
gravity.
A self-gravitating pressure-confined isothermal sphere,
with an equation of state FORMULA  (FORMULA ), is stable
once it is less massive than the Bonnor-Ebert (BE) mass
{{cite:57257e7a-ce28-4499-9cf8-e9df01c1f370}}, {{cite:a63f45dc-46f8-4148-9a7f-9952c8d2535f}},
FORMULA 
Writing the speed of sound within the clump as FORMULA ,
and the pressure confinement by the ambient ideal gas (FORMULA ) as
FORMULA , we obtain
FORMULA 
where FORMULA .
In the cosmological context, using FORMULA  from eq. (REF ) and eq. (REF ),
we obtain
FORMULA 
Using eq. (REF ) for FORMULA , and FORMULA  from eq. (REF ),
we obtain that the upper limit for BE stability is
FORMULA 
For our fiducial profiles, with FORMULA , we have FORMULA  at FORMULA ,
FORMULA  at FORMULA  and FORMULA  at FORMULA .
Thus, FORMULA  in the outer halo and FORMULA  < FORMULA 108MFORMULA We thus find that the maximum mass for Bonnor-Ebert stability is comparable to
the maximum mass for drag efficiency as (under-) estimated in eq. (REF ).
This is an interesting coincidence, which allows a broad mass range
for the clumps that are capable of serving as heating agents.

Tidal Disruption: Maximum Clump Mass
The clumps moving through the inner halo experience tidal forces
that may disrupt them before they manage to heat the ambient gas.
We assume that
disruption happens when the tidal force acting on the surface of the clump
becomes comparable to the force associated with the confining pressure.
The tidal force inside a host halo can be estimated by {{cite:7da28d81-877a-4dc0-becc-b7100f923ee7}}
FORMULA 
where FORMULA .
For an NFW profile it is FORMULA  < FORMULA 2FORMULA = 1FORMULA rsFORMULA 0FORMULA r 0FORMULA rcFORMULA P= kT/mFORMULA ft < fPFORMULA rcFORMULA C=9FORMULA rFORMULA 0.03FORMULA rsFORMULA g30FORMULA V VvFORMULA 1FORMULA 2.3108MFORMULA 1013MFORMULA z=0FORMULA gFORMULA V FORMULAFORMULA r3FORMULA We note that tidal disruption imposes an upper limit comparable to those
imposed by Bonnor-Ebert instability and by drag inefficiency,
all roughly demanding for FORMULA  at  FORMULA
FORMULA 

Local Heating versus Cooling Rates
Given an accretion rate of appropriate clumps into the halo,
we can crudely estimate the heating rate by drag in a single passage through
a given point within the halo, in comparison with the local cooling rate.
This will provide a lower limit to the actual heating rate, which can be higher
due to repeating passages of the orbiting clumps in a given position.
Consider a radial accretion of clumps in a rate FORMULA .
The work done by drag per unit time and unit mass of ambient gas
of density FORMULA  in a shell of radius FORMULA  is
FORMULA 
The clump velocity FORMULA  drops out, and using eq. (REF ) we obtain
FORMULA 
Inserting the average cosmological accretion rate from eq. (REF ),
the heating rate becomes
FORMULA 
Dividing FORMULA  from eq. (REF ) by the cooling rate from eq. (REF ), we obtain
FORMULA 
The local heating rate balances the cooling rate, FORMULA , for
FORMULA 
If each clump passes 5.5 times in each radius over a Hubble time,
the balance condition becomes FORMULA , and the corresponding
FORMULA  becomes FORMULA  times higher.
These values of FORMULA  are plotted in Fig. REF  for our fiducial case.
We learn that the drag heating by clumps less massive than FORMULA 
can overcome the cooling in the inner halo in a single passage,
while more massive clumps require multiple passages in the same location.
The actual heating rate by such clumps will be evaluated by simulations below.

Gas clumps in Dark-Matter Subhaloes
Effect on the Clump Mass Estimates
So far we have considered self-gravitating gas clumps of gas mass FORMULA .
As will be discussed below,
these clumps may initially be embedded in dark-matter subhaloes,
such that the total effective initial clump mass is FORMULA .
As long as the dark subhalo is attached to the gas clump, we can crudely
evaluate its qualitative effects on our clump mass estimates.
In terms of the overall energetics considered in §,
the total gravitational energy associated with
the accretion of the clumps into the center of the potential well could
become larger by a factor that may be a significant fraction of FORMULA .
The potential for overcoming the overall cooling is therefore higher,
namely the threshold mass for quenching could become as small as
FORMULA .
The clump fragmentation as estimated in §REF 
is driven by the hydrodynamical instabilities at the boundaries of
the dense gas component with the ambient hot gas, which may
or may not be affected by the presence of dark-matter subhaloes.
The subhalo potential well is likely to slow down the fragmentation
process, which may allow even smaller clumps to penetrate to the inner halo.
The estimated minimum clump mass of FORMULA  may therefore
remain the same or become somewhat smaller.
On the other hand, once the drag force remains the same while the clumps
carry larger inertia, their orbital decay (§REF ) should be less
efficient,
and the associated maximum mass for effective heating of the inner halo
gas by drag would possibly decrease by a significant fraction of FORMULA .
The potential for overcoming the cooling by drag at the first passage
would be weakened. Thus, an effective heating by relatively massive gas
clumps in subhaloes would rely on a quick separation between the gas and
dark-matter components.

Separation of Gas and Dark-Matter Subhalo
The ram-pressure drag is acting on the gas component only. Once the drag is
stronger than the gravitational force tying the gas clump
to its dark-matter subhalo, the two components detach from each other
and the treatment of the gas clump as isolated is justified.
Assuming an NFW density profile inside the subhalo,
the maximum restoring gravitational force per unit mass, FORMULA ,
is obtained somewhat below its inner radius,
FORMULA ,
where FORMULA  is the subhalo virial radius and FORMULA  is its effective
concentration parameter. The condition for separation then becomes
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is on the order of the virial velocity of the subhalo.
Expressing FORMULA  in terms of FORMULA  of the host halo, eq. (REF ),
and using the standard relation between virial quantities,
FORMULA , we obtain separation for
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  and FORMULA .
The second equality is for our fiducial case at FORMULA , where FORMULA ,
and assuming FORMULA .
This means that all clumps of gas mass
FORMULA  are expected to get separated from their
subhaloes before or during their first passage through the inner halo.
In more massive haloes, the separation is even more effective.

Simulations of Gas Clumps
Simulations: Method
The analytic estimates of § are based on several
crude approximations.
In particular, the clumps were assumed to move inward radially and in
a constant velocity. On the other hand, we learned that the orbital
decay of the FORMULA  clumps into the halo core is important
for their ability to effectively heat the ambient gas.
We therefore perform simulations of heating by clumps as they move
on general orbits that properly respond to the gravitational potential
well and to the gaseous drag and dynamical friction. The simulations include
clump fragmentation and possible re-merging, and they allow imposing
Bonnor-Ebert stability when desired.
Halo
The spherical halo profiles,
including dark matter and gas in hydrostatic equilibrium,
are adopted from §REF .
In our current simulations, these profiles
are assumed to remain static as the cold clumps fall through the halo,
ignoring for now the structural response of the ambient gas to the
heating by clumps.
Our fiducial halo has FORMULA  and FORMULA .
The total density profile is NFW (FORMULA )
and the gas has a flat density core (FORMULA ).

Initial Clumps
Each clump of initial mass FORMULA  starts at the virial radius of the host halo
with an initial velocity of amplitude FORMULA  and a direction set such
that each of the two tangential components equals FORMULA  times
the radial component (i.e., FORMULA  and FORMULA  for radial and
circular orbits respectively).
In our fiducial case for the simulations,
we start with FORMULA  and FORMULA ,
corresponding to a typical
subhalo orbit in dissipationless N-body simulations,
where the ratio of pericenter to apocenter is 1:6 {{cite:986462fa-1859-40b4-b5b0-e515fccbb09b}}.
The clump temperature is assumed to be fixed at FORMULA K until it disintegrates.
In order to avoid artifacts that may be associated with a specific choice
of the initial conditions, we simulate 4000 clumps with slightly different
initial conditions and average the results.
The initial values of FORMULA , FORMULA  and FORMULA  are drawn at random from
normal distributions about the chosen mean values,
with standard deviations FORMULA ,
FORMULA  and FORMULA  respectively,
with the additional constraint that the parameters are all non-negative.
The accretion rate is assumed to be given by eq. (REF ),
with a fraction of mass in clumps in the fiducial case FORMULA ,
such that the total gas fraction is FORMULA .

Forces
Each clump is moved as a test particle by integrating its
equation of motion in time through three-dimensional space.
The forces that act on
each clump are the gravitational force exerted by the host-halo potential
well, the drag force due to the ambient gas, eq. (REF ),
and the dynamical friction acting on the
clump by the dark-matter
and gas of the host halo {{cite:dffa17e3-ffcc-4260-8842-b0821d497381}}.
The clump radius entering the drag force is varied according to
the pressure balance with the ambient gas, eq. (REF ), assuming that the
temperature and density are uniform within the clump.

Fragmentation and Mergers
Fragmentation is assumed to occur once the clump has ploughed through
ambient gas mass equal to its own mass. This is computed by performing
an integral similar to eq. (REF ) but along the actual orbit of the clump.
At this point the clump breaks into FORMULA  equal fragments,
which are assumed to conserve energy and momentum and continue on the
same orbit side by side.
In some test runs, the clumps are assumed to merge when they collide
with each other. These mergers could make some difference in the dense
inner halo, where the collision rate could be high and the mergers
may bring the fragmentation process to saturation.
The mean time between collisions is estimated by FORMULA ,
where FORMULA  is the number density of clumps at that radius,
FORMULA , and FORMULA  is the clump velocity,
all averages over many clumps on different orbits.
Since the density of clumps is affected by the mergers themselves,
it is determined by a numerically stable iterative procedure, where
the clump number density profile is the average of the final profiles
from the previous two iterations.
The actual time for a collision event of a clump, FORMULA , is drawn at random from
an exponential probability distribution FORMULA .
Once a clump goes through a collision,
the clump mass is increased by an amount equivalent
to the average clump mass at that radius.
The collision is assumed to be totally inelastic,
where momentum is conserved
and kinetic energy is lost. A certain fraction of it, FORMULA , is assumed to
be deposited in the ambient gas, and the rest is lost to radiation.

End of Clumps
We stop simulating the evolution of a clump once it either becomes
bound within the innermost FORMULA  of the host halo or
it has been disintegrated to fragments smaller than FORMULA 
of its initial mass. The remaining kinetic energy of the clump, minus the
energy necessary to heat its gas to FORMULA , is added to the ambient gas at that
radius. When the clump survives for a period longer than FORMULA ,
or when the clump exceeds the Bonnor-Ebert mass (if this feature is turned on),
the clump is removed from the simulation without adding any further energy
to the medium.

Gas in Subhaloes
When testing the case of gas clumps embedded in dark-matter subhaloes,
we assume complete separation between the two components
once eq. (REF ) is satisfied.

Fiducial Case
The fiducial case in the results presented below consists of
gas clumps with masses about FORMULA  in a halo of FORMULA .
The gas fractions in the hot medium and in the cold clumps are
FORMULA , with metallicity FORMULA .
Clumps start at the virial radius with a mean velocity of
FORMULA  and FORMULA .
The fragmentation is into FORMULA  fragments, mergers are ignored,
and BE stability is not imposed.

Simulations: Individual Clumps
We start by studying the evolution of a single clump along its orbit.
Figures REF  to REF 
show the time evolution of the following clump properties:
its radius within the halo, its velocity, its mass,
the fractional energy lost by the clump (and deposited in the ambient gas),
and the clump mass relative to the Bonnor-Ebert mass for stability.
Figure REF  shows the fiducial case, and in the following figures
we vary one parameter at a time about the fiducial case.
Although the different cases may show different behaviors,
we will see in the next section that in many cases they are
as effective as cooling agents.
FIGURE 
In the fiducial case,
the FORMULA  clump and its fragments move along an orbit through a
sequence of pericenters and apocenters. The orbit decays because of
the ram-pressure drag, and it enters the FORMULA  core by FORMULA  Gyr.
The clump fragments for the first time at the vicinity of the first pericenter,
near FORMULA  at FORMULA  Gyr, and it practically disintegrates
while it is well inside the inner core by FORMULA  Gyr.
The drag is at maximum when the velocity and density are at maximum,
near pericenter, and this is where the energy loss rate is maximal.
By the time the orbit has decayed to FORMULA , the clump has deposited
in the gas about one half of the total energy that it has potentially
available, while the other half is deposited inside FORMULA  by FORMULA  Gyr.
Note that the velocity remains for many orbits on the order of FORMULA ,
to within a factor of 2, justifying the crude approximation made in
§. However, the factor of 2 increase in velocity during the first
infall, corresponding to a factor of 4 in drag force, makes the FORMULA 
clump more effective than estimated from Fig. REF . Eq. (REF )
is therefore an underestimate of the actual maximum clump mass for
effective heating in a Hubble time, as suspected.
We also see in Fig. REF  that
the clump mass is significantly below FORMULA  at all radii,
meaning that it remains gaseous and stable against collapse and star
formation under its own gravity.
Figure REF  explores the dependence on the fragmentation recipe.
In the top panel the fragmentation is turned off, FORMULA ,
namely the clump mass remains constant as it moves along its orbit
through a sequence of pericenters and apocenters.
The orbital decay into FORMULA  is only slightly slower than for FORMULA ,
but it does become less efficient well inside the core, reaching FORMULA 
at twice the time.
Correspondingly, the total energies used for heating the core in the FORMULA 
and FORMULA  cases are comparable.
The bottom panel presents a case with more efficient fragmentation, FORMULA .
The decay into the inner core is faster, but the clump completely
disintegrates before it manages to make it into the very center.
By simulating cases in which the clumps are assumed to merge when they collide,
we find (not plotted) that the effect is negligible when the fraction of the
energy deposited in the hot medium is FORMULA .
Even in the extreme case where the colliding clumps are assumed
to disappear without depositing any energy into the hot medium,
the effect of mergers is rather small.
Figure REF  shows that
the clump mass is significantly below FORMULA  at all radii
for any fragmentation scenario, with the BE stability increasing with increasing
FORMULA . We also find that the stability is slightly decreasing with more
efficient merging.
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
Figure REF  explores the effect of orbit eccentricity.
As a function of decreasing FORMULA , from circular (FORMULA ) to radial
(FORMULA ) orbits,
the orbital decay rate and the fragmentation rate are both faster.
This results in a higher heating rate in the core, but only by a factor
less than three from circular to radial orbits.
While for any eccentricity the clump mass is below FORMULA ,
it is getting close, FORMULA , in the case of a radial
orbit near the first passage through the center.
When starting in a radial orbit at rest, instead of with
an infall velocity FORMULA , the first entry to the core happens later,
but it has no significant effect on the evolution once inside the core
(not plotted).
Figure REF  shows the dependence on clump mass for FORMULA .
At FORMULA , the clump disintegrates well outside the core
and deposits all its energy there. Such clumps cannot serve as heating agents
for the core.
Clumps in the range FORMULA  are all properly fragmenting,
penetrating to the core and depositing their energy there.
The time it takes for the orbit to decay is longer with increasing clump mass,
but all the clumps in this mass range deposit most of the available
gravitational energy in time, and they are BE stable at all times.
At FORMULA , the orbit decay is slow so the clump barely makes
it into the core in a Hubble time. Thus, only a fraction of the energy
available in the potential well is deposited in the core during the multiple
passages of the clump there. The total energy deposited, and its balance with
the cooling rate, will be clarified in the next section
when we consider a whole population of clumps given an accretion rate.
For an initial clump of FORMULA , the clump mass is only slightly
below FORMULA  when it enters the core.
The orbit of an FORMULA  clump does not decay significantly
in a Hubble time, so only about 10% of the energy available in the
potential well is deposited. This may lead to insufficient total energy
deposit for balancing the cooling. For an initial clump of FORMULA ,
the clump mass is always above FORMULA .
Figure REF  shows the dependence on halo virial mass for FORMULA .
The times for fragmentation and orbital decay are increasing with halo mass.
Still, the orbit does decay to inside the core in a Hubble time even for
FORMULA , and the vast majority of the available gravitational
energy is deposited in time.
Figure REF  shows the average properties of the clump distribution as a
function of radius in steady state from a simulation of our fiducial case.
The mass density in clumps is comparable to that of the ambient gas near
FORMULA . It is FORMULA  times lower at the virial radius,
and it becomes an order of magnitude higher at the inner core.
FIGURE 
FIGURE 

Simulations: Heating/Cooling Rate
Our main results from the current simulations are expressed in terms of the
gravitational heating rate versus the radiative cooling rate at every radius
within the halo.
The accretion rate of clumps is assumed to
be a fraction FORMULA  of the total average cosmological accretion rate
as approximated by eq. (REF ), with a fraction FORMULA  in hot gas.
Figure REF  shows the actual heating and cooling rates for the
fiducial case, clumps about FORMULA  in a halo of FORMULA .
We see that the heating overwhelms the cooling by a factor
of three or more at all radii.
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
Figure REF  tests the sensitivity of the heating-to-cooling (H/Q) ratio
to the fragmentation recipe, the orbits, and the presence of a dark-matter
subhalo.
With no fragmentation, or fragmentation to only a few fragments at a time,
the H/Q ratio is 3 or more everywhere. With more efficient fragmentation,
FORMULA , the heating is almost the same outside FORMULA , it is
still winning outside FORMULA , but is barely sufficient inside
FORMULA  (short dash, blue).
When including the effect of mergers between clumps in a way that is
most unfavorable to the cause of heating, namely when they are assumed
to disappear with no additional energy deposited in the medium,
FORMULA  is still of order unity even inside the core (dot-dash, magenta).
The orbit dependence is weak — only a factor of two between radial
and circular orbits. Even clumps that start on circular orbits end up beating
the cooling by a factor of order two or more everywhere.
The inclusion of dark-matter subhaloes
makes only a negligible change for FORMULA .
The effect is weak because of the
separation of the gas and dark-matter components by ram-pressure
near the first pericenter.
We conclude that the results from the adopted fiducial case
could be interpreted as fairly representative, with no great need to worry
about the actual recipes adopted for the fragmentation and mergers,
the orbits, or being embedded in dark-matter subhaloes.
FIGURE 
Figure REF  explores the H/Q ratio at the different radii
as a function of clump mass, halo mass, or clump and hot gas mass fraction.
The top panel confirms our estimate from §
that in a halo of FORMULA 
the effective clumps are limited to the range FORMULA -FORMULA .
While clumps of FORMULA  do it in a single passage,
clumps in the range FORMULA -FORMULA  provide the necessary heating
via repeating passages at a given radius within the core.
Nevertheless, the H/Q ratio for clumps in the effective range are very similar,
rather insensitive to the actual clump mass.
Note that FORMULA  clumps deposit enough energy in the core
even though their orbits do not manage to decay into well inside
the core in a Hubble time. Despite the fact that each of these clumps
deposits only a fraction of the energy available in the potential well,
the drag they exert collectively while passing repeatedly through the
core transfers enough energy to balance the cooling rate, as argued in
§REF .
Clumps of FORMULA  fail to overcome the cooling in the inner halo;
their weak deceleration by drag is not enough for a significant orbital
decay, and the energy deposited during the transient passages through
the core is below the cooling rate.
Clumps of FORMULA 
also fail; they cannot penetrate to the core
because the drag they suffer in the outer halo and the associated
fragmentation are too effective.
The middle panel of Fig. REF  shows the dependence on halo mass for
FORMULA  clumps.
Recall that once the halo is less massive than
the threshold for virial shock heating, FORMULA ,
there is no two-phase medium,
and the heating mechanism addressed here cannot work.
The H/Q ratio is above unity at all radii for haloes of
FORMULA  and above, as estimated in §.
As seen before, FORMULA  everywhere for FORMULA ,
relevant to big ellipticals or small groups.
It rises to FORMULA  for cluster masses, FORMULA .
Note that the heating efficiency in the inner core becomes roughly the same
for FORMULA  and FORMULA  haloes. This is because of
the weaker deceleration by drag and the slower fragmentation of the
FORMULA  clumps in the former, where FORMULA  is higher.
The bottom panel of Fig. REF  explores the dependence on the fractions
of clump mass and hot gas mass, FORMULA  and FORMULA , assuming that the total
gas fraction is FORMULA .
We see that the H/Q ratio is above unity everywhere as long as
FORMULA , or crudely FORMULA .
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
Figure REF 
summarizes our results by displaying the total heating to cooling
ratio in the inner halo, FORMULA , as a function of halo mass
and for different clump masses. Here, unlike in previous figures,
we also show cases that deviate
from the fiducial case by the values of the two  mass parameters.
As seen before,
gravitational heating by clumps with initial masses in the range
FORMULA 
overcomes the
cooling in the cores of haloes of FORMULA  and above.
We now learn, for example, that clumps of FORMULA  could in
principle be effective in heating FORMULA  haloes.
This is true, however, only when ignoring the upper limit imposed
on FORMULA  by Bonnor-Ebert instability.
We see that these massive clumps do deposit some energy in the cores of haloes
below FORMULA , during their few quick passages through the core,
but this is not enough for balancing the cooling rate there.
At the small-mass end,
it is interesting to see that clumps of FORMULA , which fail to
heat the cores in haloes below FORMULA , do manage to heat
the cores of rich cluster haloes FORMULA .
This is because the strong confining pressure due to the high virial
temperature compresses the clumps into smaller sizes with reduced
surface area. This weakens the deceleration by drag and
the corresponding fragmentation efficiency, and thus permits better
penetration of these small clumps into the massive-halo cores.
We also find that no clumps can overcome the cooling in the cores
of FORMULA  haloes, despite the presence of
shock-heated gas in halos above FORMULA .
This is because the accretion rate into such haloes does not carry enough
total power for overcoming the cooling rate, §.
Figure REF  summarizes the constraints from the simulations
in the FORMULA -FORMULA  plane,
otherwise adopting the parameters of the fiducial case.
The contours mark equal FORMULA  values as integrated inside the FORMULA  core.
The lower limit on the halo mass for FORMULA  is robust near
FORMULA , consistent with the estimates
of § based on the global energy balance, and rather insensitive
to the clump mass. This is because, in the range FORMULA ,
the clumps manage to share with the ambient gas most of the energy available
to them when falling deep into the potential well.
In FORMULA  haloes, the requirement FORMULA  puts the
lower limit for effective clumps at FORMULA ,
decreasing to FORMULA  in haloes of
FORMULA .
The upper limit for effective drag is FORMULA  at
FORMULA , rising steeply with halo mass.
The lower, red contours at the top refer to equal FORMULA  values in simulations
where clumps are eliminated once larger than the Bonnor-Ebert mass,
eq. (REF ). The BE FORMULA  contour provides the practical constraint,
requiring an upper limit of FORMULA  at
FORMULA , which is rising slowly to FORMULA 
at FORMULA .
This is slightly different from the crude estimate
of eq. (REF ), shown as a line with a small negative slope,
because the simulations involve a distribution of masses
and the Bonnor-Ebert instability does not necessarily occur exactly at FORMULA .
As expected, the upper limit imposed by tidal disruption is somewhat
weaker than the constraints imposed by FORMULA .
Figure REF  summarizes the constraints in the FORMULA -FORMULA  plane
at FORMULA . The minimum halo mass for gravitational quenching is now lower,
FORMULA , similar to the estimate in §.
The minimum clump mass for penetration is now smaller than it was at FORMULA 
by an order of magnitude,
as expected from the scaling with FORMULA  in eq. (REF ).
The maximum clump mass for Bonnor-Ebert stability is only slightly smaller than
its value at FORMULA , consistent with the scaling in eq. (REF ), where the FORMULA 
dependence of FORMULA  via FORMULA  almost balances the
FORMULA  dependence via FORMULA .
The maximum mass for effective drag is now higher by an order of magnitude,
as expected from the scaling with FORMULA  in eq. (REF ), and the
strong dependence of FORMULA  on FORMULA  in eq. (REF ).
The simulations thus confirm the estimates that the gravitational heating is
more effective at higher redshifts, with the mass range broader both for
the halo mass and the clump mass.

Heating by Dynamical Friction
Dynamical friction (DF) is another important channel of energy transfer
between the accreting clumps and the host halo.
Here, the whole bound subhalo mass, dominated by its dark-matter component,
contributes to the heating. However, this is roughly balanced
by the fact that only a small part of the energy is deposited in the
ambient gas, the rest being spent on “heating" the host-halo dark matter.
Being proportional to the square of the total satellite mass, the dynamical
friction is significant only for subhaloes more massive than
a few percents of their host halo mass, say FORMULA .
Assuming as an upper limit on the DF effect
that the whole potential gain of infall from the virial radius
is deposited in the inner halo,
as in §, the maximum possible effect of heating by DF
can be estimated as in eq. (REF ), but with the gas-clump accretion
rate FORMULA  replaced by FORMULA , where FORMULA  is the
fraction of the total accreting mass in the form of haloes more massive
than FORMULA . (We tentatively assume here that the energy is divided between
the ambient gas and the dark matter in proportion to their masses, but in
the simulation below we do take into account the different response of the
gas to DF.) The maximum effect of DF heating can thus be
crudely estimated by FORMULA  times the maximum effect of ram-pressure or
shock heating by gas clumps.
The factor FORMULA  can be estimated using the expressions derived by
{{cite:c62c50a5-2478-4bb2-aced-966fda613092}} for the cosmological accretion rate
based on the EPS formalism.
The average total accretion rate onto a halo of mass FORMULA  at time FORMULA  is
well approximated by
FORMULA 
with FORMULA . Here FORMULA  is the rms linear density fluctuation
encompassing mass FORMULA  normalized by FORMULA ,
and FORMULA  with FORMULA  the growth rate of linear
density fluctuations in the assumed cosmology.
In the relevant halo mass range, FORMULA , this approximation
is slightly higher than the explicit estimate in eq. (REF ), but only by
less than 15%.
The part of this accretion that comes in haloes of mass below some mass
FORMULA  is approximated by
FORMULA 
For a standard FORMULA CDM cosmology, halo masses FORMULA  in the range relevant
for galaxies and clusters, and FORMULA  between 1% and 10% of FORMULA ,
we obtain quite robustly FORMULA . This implies that the heating by
DF can contribute a significant fraction of the total gravitational heating.
The maximum effect of DF in terms of heating versus cooling
can therefore be described in Fig. REF  by a curve similar to the curve
shown for the total heating but a factor of two lower, implying
that a most effective DF heating may by itself balance the overall
cooling at FORMULA  in haloes of FORMULA .
Based on such simple considerations and simplified simulations,
the DF has indeed been argued to have an important overall effect on
slowing down the cooling in clusters, though perhaps not enough for
properly balancing the cooling rate in the cluster cores
{{cite:89b46f03-2998-4303-a4cf-cd34895c921c}}, {{cite:9c1568d8-d52d-4cc5-9bb0-5bc8a9ea5a26}}, {{cite:d22a997a-2427-4f98-86a0-44d51eab7506}}.
A similar conclusion can be obtained from the apparent failure of
certain hydrodynamical simulations of massive haloes to prevent cooling flows
in all cases {{cite:50aca558-900e-4144-8ef6-0cb6af83d178}}, {{cite:05fc356e-846e-4de1-9805-3f5f59210c53}}, {{cite:58b2ca53-1243-429b-ad34-b487b8d557cf}}. This is
as long as they do not incorporate another heating source such as
AGN feedback that is practically put by hand
{{cite:43625509-06a4-4e97-9af2-0799296d7933}}.
On the other hand, most of the cluster simulations by {{cite:fdee063e-3a9f-4991-a56f-8730d5c69ae2}}
seem not to show substantial cooling flows (private communication with A.
Kravtsov), which are somehow prevented by gravitational heating alone,
without any additional energy source.
Despite the fact that all these hydrodynamical simulations are expected
to resolve the massive subhaloes that provide most of the DF work,
the apparently conflicting results indicate that the dust has not settled
yet on the actual role of DF heating. As far as heating by gas clumps,
the current simulations clearly fail to resolve small
enough gas clumps for the ram-pressure heating to play a major role.
In order to complete our crude estimate for the possible role of heating
by DF, we use simplified simulations similar to those described in
§REF , where the response of the ambient gas to dynamical-friction
is properly computed following {{cite:dffa17e3-ffcc-4260-8842-b0821d497381}}.
Since our simulations do not incorporate tidal mass loss from the clumps
or the subhaloes that may be attached to them, they tend to overestimate
the effect of DF, and should therefore be interpreted only as upper limits
on the role of DF, much like the energetics estimates discussed above.
We perform simulations similar to those described in §,
but with the accreting subhalo masses drawn at random from the mass function
derived from the accretion rates in eq. (REF ) and eq. (REF ).
Figure REF  shows the resulting FORMULA  ratio in the 10% halo core
as a function of halo mass, compared to the FORMULA  shown earlier in
Fig. REF  for our fiducial gas-clump model.
We see that the DF heating can be as large as one third of the ram-pressure
heating. Nevertheless, recall that the subhaloes providing the DF heating
are automatically available in a standard cosmological accretion, while the
origin of the population of gas clumps required for efficient ram-pressure
heating is more speculative (§REF ).
Figure REF  compares the maximum DF heating by a single subhalo of mass
FORMULA  (with the tidal striping ignored) to the ram-pressure heating by
a gas clump of mass FORMULA .
We see that DF heating is negligible for the clumps that are relevant
for ram-pressure heating, FORMULA ,
but it becomes the dominant effect for massive subhaloes that are
on the order of 1% of their host halo mass or larger.
FIGURE 
FIGURE 

Discussion
On the Physics of Dissipation
The actual process of energy deposition by ram pressure should
be investigated in more detail. This study can build upon the key results of
{{cite:2813895e-165d-4c65-8320-ee6ae3be55bb}} and {{cite:e8b98a74-749b-4861-b9bf-bc50be86eef3}} that most of the ram-pressure
drag work is deposited in the ambient gas rather than in the dense clumps.
When a cold clump moves subsonically through the hot gas,
the energy is deposited as kinetic energy.
The population of clumps moving on different orbits create turbulence 
on a scale comparable to the mean distance between clumps, which
cascades down to the scale where viscous heating becomes efficient.
If a non-negligible fraction of the energy is temporarily
stored in the turbulence reservoir it can have interesting consequences
on the efficiency of clumps as quenching agents.
The turbulence increases the effective pressure on scales larger
than the mean separation between clumps, helping the halo gas expand
in response to the clumpy accretion and hence slowing down its cooling rate.
The turbulent component does not cool like the thermal component,
and, since the clumps are smaller than the smallest eddies,
the turbulence does not add to the pressure confining the clumps.
Following {{cite:77a4cf0f-6398-48cb-8cff-9eb6bb956fab}}, in a steady state, with energy input
rate per unit mass FORMULA  into eddies of scale FORMULA ,
the energy stored in the turbulence per unit mass can be written as
FORMULA , with FORMULA 
[{{cite:2093ca7c-2f61-4eb5-b79e-4ea5a276a1bf}} and {{cite:01d72081-b1bc-4674-ba52-6cb6ca502274}}].
The corresponding pressure is FORMULA .
Using our simulations, we obtain at every radius the energy deposit rate
FORMULA  and the mean clump separation FORMULA , and compute the ratio of
FORMULA  to the thermal energy. This is plotted in Fig. REF .
We find that this ratio, at FORMULA  say, ranges from FORMULA  to
FORMULA  when the halo mass ranges from FORMULA  to FORMULA ,
respectively.
This crude estimate is on the same order of magnitude as
results of hydrodynamical simulations {{cite:56412c13-f198-4029-896c-63d8dcc3b32f}}, {{cite:58b2ca53-1243-429b-ad34-b487b8d557cf}},
perhaps indicating that clumpy accretion may play a non-negligible role
in driving turbulence in these simulations.
The non-negligible energy stored in turbulence at FORMULA 
may reduce the lower limit for effective quenching to below the
FORMULA  obtained without the turbulence reservoir.
The fragmentation  of the gravitating clumps due to hydrodynamical
instabilities should also be studied in more detail, following up on the
pioneering work of {{cite:2813895e-165d-4c65-8320-ee6ae3be55bb}}. Simulating a single clump
falling under gravity through ambient hot gas may be feasible immediately.
Another challenge would be to investigate how the system of clumps
may develop a steady-state mass function above a minimum mass due to the
competing effects of fragmentation and coalescence
{{cite:a2413156-9cf5-4867-9b18-b85f407292ca}}.
Our estimates of the cooling rate were limited so far to the radiative losses
from the smooth hot medium, but in a following study one should also evaluate
the possible enhancements to the cooling rate associated with the clumps
themselves and with the two-phase medium.
One such cooling source is the gas stripped from the surface of the clump
by ram pressure
{{cite:4ed0e631-b5e9-4796-a9d8-46f44dbd6b83}}.
This gas is expected to be at lower entropy than the ambient gas and
therefore to radiate more efficiently.
On the other hand, this energy loss may be limited by the coalescence of
the stripped gas and small clumps back into bigger clumps {{cite:a2413156-9cf5-4867-9b18-b85f407292ca}}.
Another potential source of energy loss from the hot medium is
thermal conduction into the cold clumps, which strongly depends
on the uncertain strength of the conductivity
{{cite:8bf84cb7-619a-43d2-969f-b6e5a7a9d5f4}}.
The Bonnor-Ebert analysis for the stability of the gas clumps against their
own self gravity should be expanded to include thermal stability against
the formation of a two-phase medium inside the clumps themselves,
which is possible for particular values of metallicity
{{cite:5e1a4e16-13b2-4705-8fa1-0cffb3efa2c4}}.
This is potentially another route to star formation, which may weaken the
effectiveness of the clumps as heating agents.

On the Origin of Gas Clumps
The origin of gas clumps in the desired mass range, containing a large
enough fraction of the accreting gas, remains a key open issue
for the feasibility of the model. At this point we only attempt a preliminary
discussion of certain options.
One possibility is that the gas clumps form embedded in the
cosmological population of small dark-matter haloes that become subhaloes
through a sequence of minor mergers building up the larger halo.
For the gas clumps to be in the proper mass range for effective ram-pressure,
FORMULA , the halo masses have to be in the range FORMULA .
As long as an external ionizing flux is effective in keeping the gas at
FORMULA K, even in the vicinity of big haloes where the density is
FORMULA  above the universal mean, gas cannot accumulate in haloes
less massive than FORMULA  {{cite:5c2eaec7-9565-40bc-b4ae-5f7bb153b61f}} and cannot
survive evaporation from smaller haloes {{cite:dc44bbfc-5239-4eec-9754-d0e4804a781f}}, {{cite:00c8fed0-97f5-4cdd-8fd2-d8cdca4c0242}}, {{cite:fd16e147-8545-447c-9e13-6c891d70d84c}}.
Thus, proper clumps can exist inside subhaloes only if the ionization
is ineffective. This may be the case before the universe becomes reionized at
FORMULA , by which most FORMULA  haloes are already in place
{{cite:2a11fbd2-a17e-4e31-a243-05d3f4d78564}}.
The photoionization may become ineffective again after FORMULA 
{{cite:df64f135-313f-4849-89cb-972fcd469206}},
or in the likely event that
the dense clumps become shielded from the ionizing flux.
If the clumps are not ionized and the environment is still
partly expanding, the gas can cool adiabatically, which may allow it to
remain bound even in small haloes.
We estimated (§REF ) that
even if the clumps come in as part of subhaloes, the dark
component should not have a substantial effect on the role of the clumps
as heating agents, since clumps in the relevant mass range would separate
from their subhaloes by ram pressure before they enter the inner halo.
Another, perhaps more relevant possibility is that the cold gas clumps
fragment from the hot gas by thermal instability
and establish a two-phase medium in pressure equilibrium.
With the peak cooling rate at FORMULA  > FORMULA 104FORMULA >105FORMULA 1012MFORMULA Clumps can form by thermal instability as long as the cooling function
FORMULA  is a decreasing function of FORMULA .
This is valid for haloes with FORMULA K
(for FORMULA solar metallicity), namely FORMULA  at FORMULA .
This mechanism cannot provide the clumps necessary
for heating rich clusters of galaxies, unless the clumps form in the cooler
filaments outside the halo and then fall into the virial radius.
{{cite:8bf84cb7-619a-43d2-969f-b6e5a7a9d5f4}} provide a detailed discussion of the formation and
survival of such clumps, in the context of the formation of big disk galaxies
in dark-matter haloes. They specifically address a lower limit to the
clump mass due to thermal conduction, whose strength is parameterized
by FORMULA , the fraction of the classical Spitzer conductivity {{cite:8154f79b-631a-41b1-a349-b1e030b49165}}.
They estimate that conductivity would suppress the formation of small
clumps and impose a lower limit of
FORMULA 
(MB04, eq. 31).
This implies that if the conductivity is as high as
FORMULA  {{cite:44f01535-13ad-4bb9-bbc3-c23c15533d0c}}, it would
limit the mass range of effective clumps that could form by thermal
instability inside virialized haloes of FORMULA 
to FORMULA .
On the other hand, if FORMULA  is significantly smaller, as expected in the
presence of a uniform magnetic field {{cite:88c76d2e-a27c-416d-8828-d2addf71a1ad}},
the minimum mass imposed by conductivity would have a weaker effect on
the allowed mass range for effective clumps.
The lower limit for clumps that could form inside the virial halo,
with FORMULA  in eq. (REF ), is marked in Fig. REF .
The minimum mass imposed by conductive evaporation 
is smaller by an order of magnitude (MB04, eq. 36).
Note that the limit of eq. (REF ) is not valid for the formation
of clumps in the pancakes and filaments at the vicinity of haloes.
One might expect that limits imposed by formation and survival arguments
on the masses of cold gas clumps can lead to an enhancement of the gas fraction
in clumps that lie in the mass range that allows effective heating by drag.
For instance, a fraction of the cold gas that has been prevented by
conductivity or coalescence from
being in clumps much smaller than FORMULA  may find itself instead
in more massive clumps, which can more effectively penetrate into the inner
halo and heat it (§REF ).
The gas in clumps above the stability threshold of FORMULA ,
where stars can form, is likely to be removed by supernova feedback
after the first starburst {{cite:8fefa808-b687-4fdc-8db5-d5d0058efde1}}, {{cite:e7261df0-c2f0-4cc2-aa7f-edf11f1fec0c}}, and thus be added to the
reservoir of gas available for condensing into smaller, stable gas clumps
that are more effective in drag-heating the gas.

Where are the Clump Remnants?
If FORMULA  cold gas clumps are responsible for
quenching in haloes of FORMULA , one expects a total mass
in clumps of FORMULA 
acting over a Hubble time in each halo, and a small fraction of this mass
in today's remnants of these clumps that are potentially detectable.
This fraction should be significantly smaller than FORMULA , given that
(a) the crossing time from the virial radius to the halo center is
FORMULA  < FORMULA 0.2 tHubbleFORMULA 1013MFORMULA fc 0.2FORMULA Mc 10 M  yr-1 FORMULA{{cite:8bf84cb7-619a-43d2-969f-b6e5a7a9d5f4}} have argued that the observed population of
High Velocity Clouds (HVCs) in the halo of the Milky Way {{cite:62f534c8-c892-44ce-8963-0531d568a38a}}
or the Local Group {{cite:59794f4b-3ae6-42a4-b41b-17de106f00f0}}, {{cite:e4525521-fc57-45c9-bbce-282f777a395c}}
is consistent in many ways with the required population of clumps.
This includes the gas temperature
of FORMULA K indicated by a median FWHM line width of FORMULA ,
the estimated typical cloud size and mass of FORMULA ,
the kinematics of the HVC population within the halo,
and the estimated total number of a few thousands HVCs, implying a total
mass of FORMULA  in a FORMULA  halo,
in the ballpark of our model predictions.
MB04 (§8) have also argued that the desired clumps may be detected at high
redshift as the high column density absorption systems in quasar spectra,
such as Lyman limit and CIV systems {{cite:3aa430d1-591e-4246-9fc3-274426647054}},
which are observed to reside within the extended virial haloes of
bright galaxies {{cite:11ccab8f-d250-48e0-b0b7-96f95e9f7f12}}.
The remnants of the desired clumps may be detected as a minor component
of cold gas in otherwise quenched ellipticals, groups and clusters.
A large fraction of today's ellipticals contain non-negligible amounts
of cold gas, detected by radio observations as HI or CO, at the level of
FORMULA -FORMULA  per galaxy {{cite:63b18ae1-7fa1-47d2-b2a3-9619de5488a6}}.
A significant amount of HI seems to be present in the inter-galactic medium
inside groups of galaxies (L. Blitz, private communication).
Ionized, warm gas detected in ellipticals {{cite:e7b6d420-3eec-44c1-968e-19bbb2d1efca}}, {{cite:666a12ab-ac4e-4945-8d56-f63bf28db6d3}}, {{cite:04864302-9ac7-4eda-9900-a960230878ba}},
sometimes as LINERs, may be “the tip of the iceberg" indicating a
significant component of neutral gas (S. Faber, private communication).
Finally, the clump remnants may be associated with the “cold cores"
detected in about half of the X-ray clusters, in which the temperature is
slightly cooler than the virial temperature {{cite:332d4f51-ac86-4d9c-8763-67d47a371ea0}}.

Conclusion
We performed a preliminary feasibility study of a simple mechanism —
gravitational heating by accretion — for long-term quenching
in dark-matter haloes above a threshold mass FORMULA .
Such quenching is desired for explaining the existence of
red & dead elliptical galaxies
and the lack of cooling flows in clusters of galaxies.
It is now common wisdom that the halo gas is first heated to the
virial temperature by a global shock once the halo grows above this threshold
mass
{{cite:b218c686-f943-414a-b7b6-994f02fbed1c}}, {{cite:690548af-87ed-48d3-ac9b-e82f03cb0709}}, {{cite:5aa48529-943a-4a92-99b3-80fee7a23f60}}.
While the interaction of the accreting gas with the rapidly
expanding shock is enough for long-term quenching in halos of
FORMULA  {{cite:71606811-9a15-4672-a7da-f357a5867a3e}}, we addressed here the possibility
that the long-term quenching maintenance in more massive haloes is due to the
gravitational energy of cosmological accretion, being delivered to the
inner-halo hot gas by cold
flows, partly clumpy, via ram-pressure drag and local shocks
as well as dynamical friction. A robust estimate reveals that
with the average cosmological accretion rate onto haloes of
FORMULA , the gravitational energy power available by gas infall
into the bottom of the potential well can balance the overall radiative
cooling losses.
This is a necessary condition for effective heating, independent of
the actual mechanism by which the energy is deposited in the inner hot gas.
This estimate makes gravitational heating a viable competitor to the
fashionable alternative of AGN feedback,
and motivates a further study.
We then addressed specifically the case of clumpy accretion,
in which cold gaseous clumps are pressure confined by a hot medium.
We found that this is a feasible quenching mechanism in haloes of
a few times FORMULA  and above provided that the
gas clumps are in the mass range FORMULA .
Smaller clumps are slowed down by the ram-pressure drag and they
disintegrate due to hydrodynamical
instabilities before reaching the inner halo.
They do not reach the core with a sufficient excess of kinetic energy.
In addition, their formation could be suppressed by heat conductivity.
On the other hand, gas clumps that are too massive do not transfer
enough energy by ram-pressure drag in a Hubble time.
Independently, they may stop being gaseous because they
are unstable to collapse and star formation
under their own self-gravity, and they are more susceptible to tidal
disruption in the inner halo.
By simulating the process with gas clumps of a proper mass,
we confirmed that the heating rate can indeed
balance the cooling rate throughout the whole halo,
as long as FORMULA ,
the gas inner density cusp
is not steeper than FORMULA , and the mass fractions in cold
clumps and in the hot ambient gas are of the same order of magnitude.
The effect is stronger at higher redshifts, thus possibly affecting the
core structure in a way that makes the maintenance easier also at later times.
The cold flux into the center is expected not to introduce a cooling-flow
problem by itself because the accelerated clumps carry into the center more
energy per unit mass than the thermal energy of the hot medium and because they
dissolve into the hot medium.
We conclude that the gravitational quenching scenario has passed
successfully several non-trivial preliminary feasibility tests.
This refers in particular to the version where the energy is dissipated
via rather low-mass cold gas clumps.
The more massive dark-matter satellites can have a substantial
additional contribution via dynamical friction.
Many of the elements of the proposed scenario should be investigated
in more detail via hydrodynamical simulations, where
the challenge of properly resolving
FORMULA  gas clumps in FORMULA  haloes is not trivial.
While there have been preliminary attempts to resolve small clumps using SPH
simulations {{cite:ac718eaf-c5e6-4ea6-8d71-67413c9e39de}},
a proper treatment of the hydrodynamical instabilities associated with the
clumps will probably require the use of an adaptive Eulerian-grid
simulation technique {{cite:c19cd6be-ace3-42fc-84c4-dcbaf2fbfdb8}}.
An immediate next step could be performed using hydrodynamical
simulations, starting with the spherical code of {{cite:71606811-9a15-4672-a7da-f357a5867a3e}}.
While the current study has been restricted to clumps falling into a
static halo, it would be desirable to incorporate the dynamical
response  of the halo gas to the over-heating in excess of the cooling rate.
We expect the subsequent expansion of the gas
to slow down the cooling and make the heating even more effective.
In order to match the observed X-ray gas in massive haloes, the system
will have to relax into a steady-state configuration with a constant-entropy
core. It is possible that turbulence and convection may be the key
stabilizing processes.
In parallel, cosmological simulations that zoom in on massive haloes
will allow an analysis of heating by the smoother, massive cold flows.
These studies should reveal whether the observed entropy floor
in cluster cores can indeed be reproduced by gravitational heating.
If so, it may alleviate the need for special scenarios based on
either smooth accretion after pre-collapse
heating {{cite:a8495aef-c243-41b8-9ff5-a48cd47373cd}}, {{cite:16f559f0-0cb3-4e58-b4d8-9493a5c63cac}} or AGN feedback as mechanisms
for enhanced entropy production.
Based on our preliminary feasibility tests we conclude that gravitational
heating, e.g., by clumpy accretion,
is a viable scenario, complementary to AGN feedback as a long-term quenching
mechanism. They are both triggered by the shock heating of the halo
gas once above the threshold mass of FORMULA .
While the energy transfer from the small black-hole scales to the
extended halo gas requires a non-trivial and yet unknown physical mechanism,
the appeal of the gravitational heating scenario is in its simplicity
and availability. In particular,
this mechanism provides a natural explanation for the characteristic
halo mass above which quenching is effective,
and for the uniform heating over the whole halo.
The indicated dual role of cold flows in galaxy formation is fascinating.
In haloes below FORMULA , where the cooling time is shorter than
the relevant dynamical time, they seem to serve as the main source for
disc buildup and star formation. In the massive haloes, where the cooling
rate is slow, a stable virial shock can be sustained and the potential
well (FORMULA ) is sufficiently deep,
the cold flows, clumpy or smooth, can become the destructive quenching agents.
They keep the halo gas hot and thus allow the suppression of gas supply to the
central galaxy and the removal of gas from satellite galaxies.
The potentially important role played by cold flows, both in the buildup of
galaxies and in their subsequent quenching, deserves further detailed
investigations.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge stimulating discussions with and helpful comments by
James Binney, Sandy Faber, Andrey Kravtsov, Doug Lin,
Ari Maller, Gary Mamon, Chris McKee, Eyal Neistein, Jerry Ostriker,
Nir Shaviv, Volker Springel and David Weinberg.
This research has been supported by ISF 213/02, by GIF I-895-207.7/2005,
by the Einstein Center at HU, and by NASA ATP NAG5-8218.
