
Extended Cluster Model for Light, and Medium Nuclei
M. TomaselliFORMULA , T. Kühl, D. Ursescu, and S.Fritzsche
GSI, Gesellschaft für Schwerionenforschung, Darmstadt
D24691 Germany
FORMULA E-mail: m.tomaselli@gsi.de
The structures, the electromagnetic transitions, and the beta decay strengths of exotic nuclei
are investigated within an extended cluster model.
We start by deriving an effective nuclear Hamiltonian within the FORMULA  correlation operator.
Tensor forces are introduced in a perturbative expansion which includes up to the
second order terms. Within this Hamiltonian we calculate the distributions and the
radii of A=3, 4 nuclei.
For exotic nuclei characterized by n valence protons/neutrons we excite
the structure of the closed shell nuclei via mixed modes formed by
considering correlations operators of higher order.
Good results have been obtained for the calculated transitions and for the beta decay
transition probabilities.
Cluster model, exotic nuclei, electromagnetic transitions, beta decay.
Introduction
The data obtained at RIA, Riken and GSI have given new life to the old Nuclear Physics.
Nuclear structures of proton and neutron rich nuclei are and will be investigated giving a new
insight to the fundamental observable such as the nuclear forces in the proton-proton
and neutron-neutron components, shell closure far from stability, magnetic properties of weakly
excited nuclear states, and many others.
The theoretical analysis of these data requires
a reliable nuclear model which can reproduce the data of stable nuclei and be extrapolated to predict
or at least reproduce the experimental results.
The Cluster Correlation Model offers effective tools in this direction.
We have to depart, however, from a perturbative scheme which is generally used to treat the two body correlation.
Generalization to the perturbative method to include the many body correlation is in this paper realized
within an extended, non-perturbative Cluster Correlation Model.
One of the central challenges of theoretical nuclear physics is the attempt to
describe unknown properties of the exotic systems in terms of a realistic
nucleon-nucleon (NN) interaction.
In order to calculate matrix elements with the singular interaction (hard core)
we have to define effective correlated Hamiltonians.
Correlation effects in nuclei have been first introduced in nuclei by Villars {{cite:758a078a-6232-45f9-a93f-fb2d4ebf93cb}},
who proposed the unitary-model operator (UMO) to construct effective operators.
The method was implemented by Shakin {{cite:6dd72edc-352e-47dc-9573-a558753eaa71}} for the calculation
of the G-matrix from hard-core interactions.
Non perturbative approximations of the UMO have been recently applied to odd nuclei
in Ref. [3] and to even nuclei in Ref. [4].
The basic formulas of the Dynamic Correlation Model and of the
Boson Dynamic Correlation Model (BDCM) presented in the above
quoted papers have been obtained by separating the n-body correlation
operator in short- and long-range components.
The short-range component is considered up to the two body correlation
while for the long range component
the three and four body correlation operators have been studied.
The extension of the correlation operator to high order diagrams is especially important
in the description of exotic nuclei (open shell).
In the short range approximation
the model space of two interacting particles is separated in two subspaces:
one which includes the shell model states and the other (high momentum) which
is used to compute the G-matrix of the model.
The long range component of the correlation operator
has the effect of generating a new correlated model space (effective space)
which departs from the originally adopted one (shell model).
The amplitudes of the model wave functions are calculated in terms of
non linear equation of motions (EoM).
The derived systems of commutator equations,
which characterize the EoM, are finally linearized.
Within these generalized linearization approximations (GLA)
we include in the calculation presented in the paper up to the ((n+1)p1h) effective diagrams.
The linearized terms provide, as explained later in the text, the
additional matrix elements that convert the perturbative UMO expansion
in an eigenvalue equation. The n-body matrix elements needed to diagonalize the
resulting eigenvalue equations are calculated exactly
via the Cluster Factorization Theory (CFT) {{cite:861a55bc-965e-4d03-a071-b7c84784f1c0}}.

The FORMULA  correlated Hamiltonian
In order to describe the structures and the distributions of nuclei
we start from the following Hamiltonian:
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the singular nucleon-nucleon two body potential.
Since the two body states FORMULA  are uncorrelated the matrix elements of
FORMULA  are infinite. This problem can be avoided by taking matrix elements
of the Hamiltonian between correlated states.
In this paper the effect of correlation is introduced via the FORMULA  method.
In dealing with very short range correlations only the FORMULA  part of the correlation
operator needs to be considered.
Following Ref. [2] we therefore calculate an “effective Hamiltonian” by using only the FORMULA 
correlation operator obtaining:
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  refers to the long-range part of the nucleon-nucleon force
diagonal in the relative orbital angular momentum,
after the separation {{cite:7dd6b0bd-de88-415d-9302-28b4ad7887b8}}:
FORMULA 
The separation is made in such a way that the short range part produces no
energy shift in the pair state {{cite:7dd6b0bd-de88-415d-9302-28b4ad7887b8}}.
In doing shell model calculation with the Hamiltonian Eq. (REF ),
we remark: a) only the long tail potential plays an essential role in the calculations
of the nuclear structure i.e.: the separation method and the new
proposed FORMULA  {{cite:8bc39f98-3bf3-463b-83db-c7224eceb0a4}} method show a strong analogy and
b) the FORMULA  must be included as an additional re-normalization of the
effective Hamiltonian Eq. (REF ).
In Eq. (REF ) the FORMULA  is the two particle correlated wave function:
FORMULA 
In order to evaluate the effect of the tensor force on the FORMULA 
we calculate:
FORMULA 
where Q is a momentum dependent projection operator, FORMULA 
the energy denominator and FORMULA  the correlated two particle
state in the relative coordinates.
In Eq. (REF ) u(r) is generated as in Ref. {{cite:6dd72edc-352e-47dc-9573-a558753eaa71}} by a separation distance
calculation for the central part of the force in the FORMULA  state.
The wave function obtained in this way (full line) heals to the harmonic-oscillator
wave function (dashed line) as shown in Fig. 1.
The result obtained for Eq. (REF ) calculated with the tensor force
of the Yale potential {{cite:131aa0ac-6862-4a11-a8d7-a322b48a1519}}
is given also in Fig. 1 left where we plot
for the harmonic oscillator size parameter b=1.41 fm:
FORMULA 
FIGURE 

FIGURE 

FIGURE 
Being the admixture of the two components, circa FORMULA ,
the wave function Eq. (REF ) can
be associated to the deuteron wave function.
Let us use then the Hamiltonian Eq. (REF ) to calculate the structure of
the A=3 nuclei.
Here we propose to calculate the ground state of FORMULA H, FORMULA He, and FORMULA He
within the EoM
method which derive the eigenvalue equations by working with the FORMULA 
operator on the wave functions of the A=3, 4 nuclei Ref.
From the diagonalization of the eigenvalue equation of the three particles,
we obtain an energy difference
FORMULA =0.78 MeV and the distributions and radii given in Fig. 1 Right.
By extending the commutator to a four particle state
we obtain for the ground state of FORMULA He the binding energy of E=28.39 Mev and the rms radius of 1.709 fm.
In dealing with complex nuclei however the (FORMULA )
correlations should also be considered.
The evaluation of these diagrams is, due to the
exponentially increasing number of terms, difficult in a perturbation theory.
We note however that one way to overcome this problem is to work with
FORMULA  operator on the Slater's determinant
by keeping the n-body Hamiltonian uncorrelated.
Via the long tail of the nuclear potential the Slater determinant of the
“n” particle systems are interacting with the excited Slater's determinants
formed by the (“n” particles+(mp-mh) mixed-mode excitations).
The amplitudes of the different determinants are calculated via
the EoM method.
After having performed the diagonalization of the n-body Hamilton's operator we
can calculate the form of the effective Hamiltonian which, by now, includes
the complete set of the commutator equations.
The method is here applied to FORMULA He, FORMULA Be, FORMULA C, FORMULA O, and FORMULA O.
A detailed formulation of the model my be found in Ref. {{cite:f83977a9-2277-4a8a-b049-01c7ecf8aa5e}}.

Results
In order to perform structure calculations for complex nuclei, we have to define
the CMWFs base, the “single-particle energies” and to choose the
nuclear two-body interactions.
The CMWFs are defined as in Ref. {{cite:f83977a9-2277-4a8a-b049-01c7ecf8aa5e}} by including mixed valence modes
and core-excited states.
The base is then orthonormalized and, since the single particle wave functions
are harmonic oscillators, the center-of-mass (CM) is removed.
The single-particle energies of these levels are taken from the known experimental
level spectra of the neighboring nuclei.
For the particle-particle interaction, we use the G-matrix obtained from
Yale potential {{cite:36908a31-a75b-42a1-a053-0300f30b21bb}}.
These matrix elements are evaluated by applying the
FORMULA  correlation operator, truncated at the second order
term of the expansion, to the harmonic oscillator
base with size parameter b=1.76 fm.
As elucidate in Refs. [3] and [4] the effective two-body
potential used by the DCM and the BDCM models
is separated in low and high momentum components.
Therefore, the effective model matrix elements calculated within
the present separation method
and those calculated by Kuo {{cite:8bc39f98-3bf3-463b-83db-c7224eceb0a4}} in the FORMULA  approximation
are pretty similar.
The adopted separation method and the FORMULA  generate two-body
matrix elements which are almost
independent from the radial shape of the different potentials generally
used in structure calculations.
The particle-hole matrix elements could be calculated from the particle-particle
matrix elements via a re-coupling transformation.
In this contribution we present application of the FORMULA  correlated model to the
charge distributions of FORMULA He, FORMULA Be, and to the electromagnetic transitions
of neutron rich Carbon and Oxygen isotopes. The beta decay strengths from the ground state FORMULA N
to the excited states of FORMULA C are also calculated.
In Fig. 2) Left three distributions are given for FORMULA He:
1) the correlated charge distribution
calculated with the full FORMULA  operator,
2) the correlated charge distribution
calculated with the partial FORMULA  operator obtained by neglecting the folded diagrams,
3) the charge distribution calculated
for two correlated protons in the FORMULA  shell.
The full FORMULA  correlation operator therefore increases the calculated radii.
In Fig. 2) Right the charge distribution for FORMULA Be is given.
A charge radius of 3.12 fm has been obtained.
Calculations are performed in a mixed FORMULA  and FORMULA  system.
The results obtained for the Carbon and Oxygen isotopes are in the
following presented as function of the increasing valence neutrons.
It is worthwhile to remark that
the high order correlation operators generate the interaction of
the valence particles with the closed shell nucleus.
The correlation model treats therefore consistently the “A” particles of
the isotopes.
FIGURE 

FIGURE 

FIGURE 
By using generalized linearization approximations and cluster factorization
coefficients {{cite:861a55bc-965e-4d03-a071-b7c84784f1c0}} we can perform exact calculations.
In following Tables an over all b=1.76 fm has been used.
In Table 1, 3) we give the calculated magnetic moments and rms radii for one-hole and
for one-particle in FORMULA O.
The energy splitting between the ground- and the second (first)
excited states and the electromagnetic transitions for the two isotopes are
given in Tables 2, 4).
 TABLE
 TABLE
 TABLE
 TABLE
 TABLE
 TABLE
 TABLE
 TABLE
In Table 5) we give the calculated results for the energy splitting between
the ground- and the FORMULA  excited state and the
corresponding electromagnetic transition for the FORMULA C.
The commutator equations involve FORMULA  and FORMULA  diagrams.
 TABLE
 TABLE
In Table 6) preliminary results for the calculated reduced transition probabilities from the ground state of FORMULA N
to the FORMULA  excited states of FORMULA C are given. The calculated strengths reproduce reasonably
well the experimental values {{cite:86f685d6-1a2a-4a2a-9742-117c8d080325}}.
 TABLE
 TABLE
Good results have been overall obtained for the transitions with a neutron effective charge varying between
0.1- to 0.12-FORMULA .

Conclusion and Outlook
In this contribution we have investigated the effect of the microscopic
correlation operators on the exotic structure of the Carbon and
Oxygen isotopes. The microscopic correlation has been separated in short-
and long-range correlations according to the definition of Shakin.
The short-range correlation has been used to define the effective Hamiltonian
of the model while the long-range correlation is used to calculate the structures and the
distributions of exotic nuclei. As given in the work of Shakin, only the
two-body short-range correlation need to be considered in order to derive
the effective Hamiltonian especially if the correlation is of very short
range. For the long range correlation operator the three body
component is important and should not be neglected. Within the three body
correlation operator, one introduces in the theory a three body interaction
which compensates for the use of the genuine three body interaction
of the no-core shell model. Within the FORMULA  effective Hamiltonian, good results have been
obtained for the ground state energies and the distributions of
FORMULA H, FORMULA He, and FORMULA He.
The higher order correlation operators FORMULA  have been used
to calculate the structure and the electromagnetic transitions
of ground and first excited states for the isotopes of Carbon and Oxygen.
By using generalized linearization approximations and cluster factorization
coefficients we can perform expedite and exact calculations.
F. Villars, ¦Proc. Enrico Fermi Int. School of Physics XXII¦,
Academic Press N.Y. (1961).
C.M. Shakin and Y.R. Waghmare, ¦Phys. Rev. Lett.¦ ¦16¦ (1966) 403;
C.M. Shakin, Y.R. Waghmare, and M.H. Hull, ¦Phys. Rev.¦ ¦161¦ (1967) 1006.
M. Tomaselli, L.C. Liu, S. Fritzsche, T. Kühl, and D. Ursescu,
¦Nucl. Phys.¦ ¦A738¦ (2004) 216;
M. Tomaselli, Ann. Phys. ¦205¦ (1991) 362.
M. Tomaselli, L.C. Liu, S. Fritzsche, T. Kühl,
¦J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys.¦ ¦30¦ (2004) 999.
M. Tomaselli, T. Kühl, D. Ursescu, and S. Fritzsche,
Prog. Theor. Phys. ¦116¦ (2006) 699.
S.A. Moszkowski and B.L. Scott, Ann. of Phys. (N.Y.) ¦11¦ (1960) 55.
S. Bogner, T.T.S. Kuo, L. Coraggio, A. Covello, and N. Itaco,
Phys. Rev. ¦C65¦ (2002) 051301(R).
K.E. Lassila, M.H. Hull, H.M. Ruppel, F.A.McDonald, and G. Breit,
Phys. Rev. ¦126¦ (1962) 881.
M. Tomaselli, T. Kühl, and D. Ursescu, Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. ¦59¦ (2007) 455;
M. Tomaselli, T. Kühl, and D. Ursescu, Nucl. Phys. ¦A790¦ (2007) 246.
C.M. Shakin, Y.R. Waghmare, M. Tomaselli, and, M.H. Hull,
Phys. Rev. ¦161¦ (1967) 1015.
http://www.tunl.duke.edu/nucldata, and references therein quoted.
C.W. de Jager, H. de Vries, and C. de Vries, Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables
¦14¦ (1974), 479.
S. Fujii, T, Misuzaki, T. Otsuka, T. Sebe, A. Arima, arXiv:nucl-th/0602002, 2006.
S. Raman ¦et al.¦ Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables ¦31¦ (1987) 1.
A. Negret, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. ¦97¦ (2006) 062502.

